SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK
ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
PRICE AND FINANCIAL STABILITY 
FOR SUSTAINABLE GROWTH

SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   1 
INTRODUCTION
SARB overview 2
About this report 4
PRICE AND FINANCIAL STABILITY FOR 
SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
What the SARB does 6
About price and financial stability  10 
 
DELIVERING THE SARB STRATEGY
Governor’s message 14 
Connecting past successes to future opportunities
 18 
 
HOW THE SARB IS GOVERNED
Shareholding and dividend 30 
Governance
 31 
Risk management
 43 
 
THE SARB’S PERFORMANCE
Monetary policy under high uncertainty  46 
Responding to climate change risks  52 
Maintaining financial stability  53 
Protecting depositors  58 
Prudential regulation  60 
Payments: The foundation of the financial system  66 
Fintech in focus  68 
G20: Leading the Finance Track  69 
People matters  70 
Information and technology  79 
Contents
Engaging the public  81 
Investing in society  84 
Purposeful procurement  91 
Our subsidiaries 93 
 
FINANCIALS  96
Directors’ report
 97
Report of the Audit Committee 
 100
Financial r
eporting framework 
 102
Independent auditors’ r
eport to the shareholders  
of the South African Reserve Bank  103
Consolidated and separate statements of financial
  
position 110
Consolidated and separate statements of pr
ofit  
or loss and other comprehensive income  111
Consolidated and separate statements of cash flows
 112
Consolidated statement of changes in equity
 113
Separate statement of changes in equity
 115
Notes to the consolidated and separate
  
annual financial statements 117
PRUDENTIAL AUTHORITY ANNUAL  
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS 203
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION  209
Minutes of the 104th annual Ordinary General  
Meeting of the shareholders of the SARB  210  
Annexure A
 215
Abbr
eviations
 219
PHYSICAL ADDRESS
SARB Head Office
370 Helen Joseph Street 
Pretoria 0002
Telephone: 012 313 3911/0861 12 7272
POSTAL ADDRESS
P O Box 427
Pretoria 0001
CASH CENTRES
Cape Town
25 Burg Street
Cape Town 8001
Telephone: 021 481 6700
P O Box 2533 Cape Town 8000
Durban
8 Dr A B Xuma Street 
Durban 4001
Telephone: 031 310 9300
P O Box 980 Durban 4000
Johannesburg
57 Ntemi Piliso Street 
Johannesburg 2001
Telephone: 011 240 0700
P O Box 1096 Johannesburg 2000
Contact 
details
Online
The full annual financial statements of the SARB 
Group are available at  
https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/
publications/publication-detail-pages/r
eports/
annual-reports/2025-26
2 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Price and financial stability for sustainable growth   |   What the SARB does continued
The South African Reserve Bank (SARB), the 
oldest central bank in Africa, was established 
on 30 June 1921.
According to the Constitution of the Republic 
of South Africa, 1996 (Constitution), the 
SARB has a clear mandate to maintain 
price stability, which is vital for balanced 
and sustainable economic growth. The 
Constitution emphasises that the SARB must 
operate independently and without fear, 
favour or prejudice while fulfilling its primary 
objective of ensuring price stability.
SARB 
overview
Why the SARB exists
In addition to its primary mandate, the 
SARB’s powers and functions, typically 
performed by central banks, are defined by 
Acts of Parliament.
The core legislation that gives the SARB 
its powers and responsibilities include the 
South African Reserve Bank Act 90 of 1989, 
as amended (SARB Act), the Banks Act 94 
of 1990 (Banks Act), the National Payment 
System Act 78 of 1998, as amended 
(NPS Act), the Financial Markets Act 19 of 
2012 (FMA) and the Corporation for Public 
Deposits Act 46 of 1984 (CPD Act). The 
legislation that gives the SARB a statutory 
mandate to protect and enhance financial 
stability is the Financial Sector Regulation Act 
9 of 2017 (FSR Act).
The SARB operates not for profit but in the 
broader interest of all South Africans.
After accounting for certain provisions, 
payment of company taxes on profits, 
transfers to reserves and dividend 
disbursements, the surplus from the SARB’s 
earnings is remitted to the South African 
government.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   3 
How the SARB is governed
The President of South Africa appoints the Governor and 
three Deputy Governors (DGs) following consultations with 
the Minister of Finance and the SARB Board of Directors 
(Board). Additionally, the President appoints four other non-
executive directors. The Governor and DGs are executive 
members of the 15-member Board.
Seven non-executive directors are elected by SARB 
shareholders. Non-executive directors do not have any rights 
or involvement in setting monetary policy, financial stability 
policy, or regulation and supervision. As the Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO) of the SARB and Chairperson of the Board, 
the Governor holds a dual role as prescribed in the SARB 
Act. The Board’s primary responsibility is to ensure good 
corporate governance.
In this regard the SARB adopts codes of good practice and 
has appointed a lead independent director.
The SARB leads in serving the 
economic well-being of South 
Africans through maintaining price 
and financial stability.
VISION
VALUES
Open 
communication
Respect and trust
Accountability
Excellence
Integrity
PRIMARY MANDATE
(enshrined in the  
Constitution)
STATUTORY MANDATE
(enabled by
the FSR Act)
Pursue and maintain price 
stability – this protects the value of the 
currency in the interest of balanced and 
sustainable economic growth.
Protect and enhance financial 
stability – this involves identifying and 
mitigating systemic risks that could disrupt 
the financial system, while also strengthening 
the safety, soundness and integrity of 
financial institutions through the Prudential 
Authority (PA).
4 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
About  
this report 
The SARB Annual Report for the 
year ended 31 March 2025 offers  
a summary of the organisation’s 
sustained efforts to implement  
its mandate. 
This report provides a clear and concise account of the SARB’s 
strategy, performance and societal impact, highlighting both 
material financial and non-financial information.
The report primarily targets Members of Parliament (MPs), 
specifically the Standing and Select Committees on Finance, 
through which the SARB is accountable to the South African 
public. It is also relevant to shareholders and anyone interested in 
understanding how the SARB executes its mandate and strategy.
The SARB wholly owned subsidiaries
CURRENCY-PRODUCING
The South African Mint Company  
(RF) Proprietary Limited, including  
its subsidiary Prestige Bullion (RF) 
Pr
oprietary Limited (SA Mint)
The South 
African Bank 
Note Company 
(RF) Proprietary 
Limited (SABN)
INVESTMENT SERVICES
The Corporation for Public Deposits (CPD)
DEPOSIT INSURANCE
The Corporation for Deposit Insurance (CODI)  
The South African Reserve Bank
The success of achieving the SARB’s objectives depends on 
strong relationships with various stakeholders, including the 
government, other regulators and the broader community. 
These relationships are discussed throughout the report
.
THE SARB GROUP
Note: The SARB owns a 45% stake in African Bank Holdings Limited (ABHL) 
following a successful resolution process in 2014. At the time of this report, ABHL 
is considered an associate within the SARB Group. The SARB plans to sell its 
shares in ABHL through an initial public offering, which the ABHL Board has been 
assigned to manage.
Scope and boundary
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   5 
1   Copyright and trademarks ar e owned by the Institute of 
Directors in Southern Africa NPC and all of its rights are 
reserved.
The principles of each of these frameworks are 
evaluated for their balance between practicality and 
relevance to a central bank. However, if there are any 
inconsistencies between the legislative requirements 
and framework guidance, the legislative requirements 
take precedence.
The King IV™ Report on Corporate Governance 
for South Africa, 2016 (King IV™)1
The International Financial  
Reporting Standards (IFRS)
The Inter
national Integrated Reporting Council’s 
International <IR> Framework
Statement of responsibility 
In terms of Section 4A (1c) of the SARB Act, the Board is 
required to approve the annual report and financial 
statements of the SARB. The Act also mandates that these 
documents be presented to the annual Ordinary General 
Meeting (AGM) of the SARB’s shareholders, the Minister of 
Finance, Parliament and legal deposit libraries kept at five 
South African national libraries. The annual report includes 
material matters, which are essential for the SARB to fulfil 
its constitutional mandate and statutory responsibilities. This 
information reflects the SARB’s values and ensures 
accountability to Parliament and the South African public. 
The provided information was verified and approved by the 
SARB’s structures. The Governors’ Executive Committee 
(GEC) ensured that the report was factually correct and 
contained relevant and material information. The Audit 
Committee reviewed the annual report before it received 
Board approval. The Board believes that the annual report 
offers a fair and balanced account of the SARB’s 
performance, material matters and strategic direction. The 
Board approved the annual report and full annual financial 
statements for the year ended 31 March 2025 on 13 June 
2025, signed on its behalf by:
Assurance
The full Group annual financial statements included in this 
report and available online have been independently audited 
by the SARB’s external auditors – SizweNtsalubaGobodo 
Grant Thornton Inc. (SNG Grant Thornton) and BDO SA 
Inc. (BDO).
The SARB’s Internal Audit Department (IAD) provides 
objective and independent assurance on the adequacy and 
effectiveness of the Group’s governance, risk management 
and control processes.
E L (Lesetja) Kganyago
Governor of the SARB
N B (Norman) Mbazima
Non-executive director 
and Chairperson of the 
Audit Committee
R (Reshoketswe) Ralebepa 
Group Chief Financial Officer
Z (Zoliswa) Copiso 
Secretary of the SARB
Reporting frameworks
The SARB’s operations are governed by the Constitution 
and the SARB Act. Thus, the annual report is published 
in accordance with the SARB Act. Additionally, the 
report is prepared using the following frameworks:

6 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
What the SARB 
does
The SARB has a fundamental 
role, as mandated by the 
Constitution, to maintain price 
stability in the interest of 
balanced and sustainable 
economic growth. As a 
constitutional entity, the SARB 
is accountable to the people of 
South Africa. 
In addition, the SARB is tasked with protecting  
and enhancing financial stability; regulating and 
overseeing financial institutions and Financial 
Markets Infrastructures (FMIs); issuing and 
destroying banknotes and coin; and acting as the 
government’s banker. It also serves as the  
custodian of the national payment system (NPS), 
which is crucial to South Africa’s economy.
The SARB meets these objectives through a 
well-implemented strategy, supported by 
enablement functions such as transparent 
communication and coordinated policymaking  
and implementation.
PRICE AND 
FINANCIAL 
STABILITY FOR 
SUSTAINABLE 
GROWTH
6 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   7 
Inputs
Consistent communication with other 
regulators and domestic, regional and 
international stakeholders enhances 
transparency and accountability. These 
efforts include:
•
 empowering Parliament, civil society, 
businesses, labour gr
oups and other 
stakeholders with knowledge and 
understanding of the benefits of price 
and financial stability;
•
 collaborating with r
elevant government 
departments, particularly National 
Treasury (NT), and other regulators on 
various policies;
•
 engaging with financial institutions to 
assess risks to the financial sector and 
exer
cise regulatory oversight;
•
 partnering with r
esearch and academic 
institutions to enhance the SARB’s own 
research capabilities and inform its 
decision-making;
•
 actively participating in inter
national and 
regional multilateral forums to contribute 
to regional integration, inform policy and 
develop consistent financial sector 
regulatory frameworks; and
•
 br
oadening the SARB’s accessibility and 
accountability through social initiatives, 
community outreach and stakeholder 
engagements.
As its people are central to its operations, the SARB prioritises attracting 
and retaining highly skilled and knowledgeable leaders who have a solid 
grasp of economic and financial issues.
•
 Thr
ough its employee value proposition (EVP), which highlights serving 
the public good, offering development opportunities and ensuring 
organisational stability, the SARB successfully attracts and retains top 
talent.
•
 The 2 640 dedicated and well-informed employees play a crucial r
ole in 
fulfilling the SARB’s mandate and supporting its objectives. Salaries 
amounted to R3.4 billion (2023/24: R3.2 billion).
•
 Investments in training and development to upskill and r
eskill staff totalled 
R159.7 million (2023/24: R116.3 million).
•
 The SARB r
emains committed to transformation, with its diverse Board 
comprising nine women and six men, of whom 87% are black.
•
 Of its total staf
f complement, 85.7% (2023/24: 84.4%) are black and 
54.2% (2023/24: 54.7%) are women.
The SARB does not aim to generate profit. Instead, it focuses on its policy 
functions, which include the following:
•
 Pr
oducing banknotes and coin for circulation.
•
 Operating expenses that totalled R9.6 billion, funded by:
 – r
evenue from managing foreign exchange (FX) reserves amounting 
to R10 billion; and
 – inter
est from managing market operations to implement monetary 
policy, amounting to R587 million.
The SARB’s governance practices are aligned with the 
principles of good corporate governance as they apply to a 
central bank. Every employee is expected to maintain the 
highest level of ethical standards in performing their duties.
The SARB’s risk management and control framework is 
consistent with its constitutional and statutory responsibilities 
as well as best governance practices.
Effective governance and risk management are fundamental to the SARB’s sustainable 
fulfilment of its mission and mandate.
Social and relationship inputs
• Formulate and implement monetary policy.
•
 Maintain and enhance financial stability, including 
serving as the lender of last r
esort in exceptional 
circumstances.
•
 Ensur
e the safety, soundness and integrity of 
financial institutions regulated by the SARB, such 
as banks, insurance companies and market 
infrastructures.
•
 Bolster the country’
s resilience to financial shocks.
•  Ensur e the cost-effective availability and integrity of the 
currency.
•
 Compile economic statistics and conduct r
esearch and 
analysis.
•
 Act as the gover
nment’s banker.
•
 Ensur
e the effective functioning of the NPS.
•
 Administer the country’
s prudential and capital flow measures.
•
 Manage the country’
s official gold and FX reserves.
Key functions
Financial inputs
Human and intellectual inputs
8 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Price and financial stability for sustainable growth   |   What the SARB does continued
A stable and safe financial 
system
Supports economic growth and development and 
promotes job creation.
Ensures a resilient economy capable of withstanding 
vulnerabilities and shocks, reducing the costs of 
disruption.
Enhances an efficient financial system that provides 
financial services to all South Africans.
Facilitates functioning capital and financial markets that 
support real economic activity.
Low and stable inflation
Protects the purchasing power of the currency and 
standard of living of all South Africans, particularly 
those with fixed incomes who have limited means to 
protect themselves against rising prices.
Reduces uncertainty in the economy, creating an 
environment conducive to sustainable and balanced 
economic growth that supports job creation over time.
Builds trust in the value of the rand, fostering a 
favourable investment landscape.
Helps maintain and improve South Africa’s global 
competitiveness.
Financial stability
Primary outcomes
Statutory mandate
Safeguard and boost financial stability in 
South Africa by identifying and mitigating 
systemic risks that could disrupt the 
financial system, and by enhancing the 
safety, soundness and integrity of  
financial institutions.
Financial stability: page 53
Key functions continued
Price stability
Primary mandate
Maintain low and stable 
inflation by targeting  
the midpoint:
4.5%
Monetary policy: page 46
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   9 
Supporting outcomes
• Building collaborative and trust-based r elationships 
with both the public and private sectors to develop 
prudent and coherent macroeconomic policies that 
support sustainable growth.
•
 Cr
eating regulatory and supervisory frameworks that 
support financial inclusion and maintain the integrity 
of the financial system.
•
 Establishing a cr
edible central bank that earns the 
trust and respect of the South African public, 
financial institutions, international counterparts, 
regulators and governments.
•
 Forging academic partnerships that develop human 
capital to impr
ove expertise in monetary policy, 
financial stability, economics and financial journalism 
in South Africa and across Africa.
•
  A well-structur ed Board that adheres to best practice 
governance standards.
•
 Engaged and motivated employees working in a 
diverse and inclusive envir
onment.
•
 Employees that ar
e aligned with the SARB’s strategic 
objectives.
•
 A low r
egrettable employee turnover rate, which at 
1.1% for 2024/25 is well below the internal target of 
less than 4%.
•
 Knowledge and information-sharing with stakeholders 
that incr
eases transparency and credibility.
•
 A central bank equipped with the technological 
expertise to ensur
e price and financial stability as well 
as regulate financial institutions.
•
 A moder
nised payment ecosystem that enables 
accessible, rapid and affordable payments while 
safeguarding the integrity of our currency.
•
 A financially stable central bank
•
 Gr
oup profit before tax: R127 billion, of 
which R100 billion is due to the new 
GFECRA agreement (2023/24: R20 billion 
profit)
•
 SARB pr
ofit before tax: R124 billion 
(2023/24: R18 billion profit)
•
 SARB pr
ofit after tax: R118 billion, 
transferred to the contingency reserve
•
 Shar
eholder dividends: R0.2 million 
(2023/24: R0.2 million) paid in 
accordance with the SARB Act
Social and relationship outcomes Human and intellectual outcomes
Financial outcomes
10 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
What is inflation and 
how is it measured?
Inflation is the overall rise in prices of 
common goods and services, which 
diminishes the purchasing power of 
money. Keeping long-term inflation 
low is crucial for protecting 
purchasing power of money, 
containing living and business costs 
and supporting South Africa’s global 
competitiveness. The standard 
measure of inflation is the consumer 
price index (CPI), compiled by 
Statistics South Africa (Stats SA).
The CPI is determined using a basket 
of goods and services typically 
bought by a consumer. Inflation is 
measured by tracking changes in the 
prices of these items over time.
Why price stability matters
The SARB serves South Africans 
by containing inflation, which 
reduces the value of the money 
in their pockets. Its constitutional 
mandate is to protect the value 
of the currency in the interest of 
balanced and sustainable 
economic growth.
About price and 
financial stability 
How does the SARB work to achieve 
price stability?
The government, together with the SARB, has established an 
inflation target range of 3–6% to monitor price stability. To 
safeguard the value of the currency and the purchasing power 
of South Africans, the SARB aims to keep inflation within this 
target band, ideally around the midpoint of 4.5%.
What are the benefits of having an 
inflation target?
A reliable inflation target range reduces uncertainty about the 
future levels of inflation in the economy and helps manage 
expectations. With an understanding that inflation will likely be 
between 3% and 6%, households and businesses can better 
assess the purchasing power of their income and make 
informed decisions about spending and investments. This 
stability supports economic growth.
Price and financial stability for sustainable growth   |   About price and financial stability
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   11 
What factors does the 
SARB consider when 
making decisions on 
interest rates?
The Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC) considers both domestic 
and global economic conditions, 
along with the impact of its policy 
decisions on economic growth 
and employment. The MPC 
primarily focuses on the projected 
path of inflation when setting 
interest rates. Since changes in 
interest rates affect the economy 
with a delay of around 12 to 24 
months, the MPC’s decisions are 
forward-looking and aimed at 
maintaining inflation within the 
target range over the  
medium term.
Why has the SARB not 
cut interest rates more 
aggressively despite the 
decline in inflation?
Over the past year, the repurchase 
(repo) rate has been lowered by  
75 basis points as the MPC expected 
inflationary pressures to moderate. 
Adjustments to the repo rate are made 
based on the inflation outlook, 
particularly the forecast for the next  
12 to 18 months. The  global 
environment has become more 
uncertain, necessitating a cautious 
approach to monetary policy. The 
SARB’s economic forecast, which 
considers various domestic and global 
drivers of the inflation outlook, indicates 
that  the current interest rate path is 
consistent with achieving the inflation 
target in the outer years of the forecast. 
It is important for inflation to remain 
close to the target not only now but also 
over the forecast period. Long-term 
rates are often more important for 
investment. Allowing inflation 
expectations to increase over the 
forecast period increases long-term 
rates, as lenders seek compensation for 
the higher levels of inflation. Keeping 
inflation low and stable provides 
certainty and allows long-term rates  
to decrease. 
How does higher inflation affect  
South Africans?
Inflation diminishes the purchasing power of money. 
For example, R100 left in a money box for 10 years will not 
buy you the same goods and services today as it did a 
decade ago. This also affects savings and pension plans, 
which lose value if the interest earned does not keep up  
with inflation.
Inflation can widen inequality. People with fixed incomes 
see their purchasing power decline over time. While the 
wealthy often protect themselves against inflation by investing 
in assets such as shares or property that increase in value, 
the poor and those on fixed incomes such as pensioners or 
grant recipients suffer more when prices of essentials like 
food, transport and fuel go up.
Confusing price signals can result from high and volatile 
inflation. This creates uncertainty about future purchasing 
power, interest rates and real profitability for businesses. 
Such uncertainty makes decisions like buying a house or 
expanding  a business harder, potentially slowing  
economic growth.
Higher inflation usually leads to higher interest rates. 
Lenders demand higher compensation when they expect 
higher inflation, resulting in increased interest rates. This also 
reduces government resources for services like education 
and health, as borrowing and debt-servicing costs rise. In 
turn, when inflation is expected to decline, interest rates can 
come down.
When inflation is consistently higher than that of the country’s 
major trading partners or competitors, it increases production 
costs in the economy vis-à-vis production costs in other 
countries. This leads to domestic producers losing their 
competitiveness.

12 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Price and financial stability for sustainable growth   |   About price and financial stability continued
Inflation has slowed 
but why are food prices 
not coming down as 
quickly?
It is important to understand the 
difference between price levels and 
inflation. The price level is simply what 
you pay for a product. Inflation, on the 
other hand, is the rate at which those 
prices are changing – how quickly or 
slowly the prices of products are rising. 
When the SARB says that it seeks to 
contain inflation, it adjusts monetary 
policy to keep inflation low and stable, 
ensuring that prices increase at a 
manageable rate that does not quickly 
erode the buying power of consumers.
Recently, the rate at which food prices 
are increasing has slowed and, in some 
cases, prices have decreased. The 
inflation rate for food and non-alcoholic 
beverages was 2.7% in March 2025, 
compared to 6.1% in February 2024. 
Prices for some staple foods like bread, 
poultry, meat and eggs are cheaper 
now than they were a year ago. This 
drop in food inflation and even the 
decrease in prices for some products 
can be attributed to factors such as a 
stronger rand, lower global agricultural 
commodity prices and the fading 
effects of earlier price shocks such as 
the 2023 avian flu outbreak.
Ensuring a stable financial system
Why is the stability of 
the financial system 
important?
Financial stability means that the financial 
system can continue to provide efficient 
services like saving, borrowing, investing 
and transacting even when it faces shocks 
like a sudden stop in capital flows or the 
collapse of a bank. This stability is crucial 
for households and businesses to manage 
their finances and for facilitating local and 
international trade.
How does the SARB ensure the 
stability of the financial system?
The SARB’s financial stability mandate is to ensure that 
the financial system continues to function effectively, even 
under stress. This responsibility is led by the SARB, 
alongside other financial sector regulators and NT.
The SARB monitors global and domestic developments as 
well as the operations of specific financial institutions to 
identify potential risks and vulnerabilities that could 
threaten the entire financial system. It recommends policy 
actions using a macroprudential policy framework to 
protect against the build-up of vulnerabilities. It also 
conducts stress tests of financial institutions to assess 
their resilience against defined adverse scenarios.

SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   13 
Why is South Africa’s 
financial system considered 
safe and sound?
Local financial institutions are well-
capitalised, enabling them to meet their 
obligations to depositors and policyholders. 
These institutions perform well against a set 
of financial stability and microprudential 
indicators.
These include a risk and vulnerability 
measure, a net stable funding ratio to ensure 
banks have sufficient funding to support 
their assets and other debt obligations for at 
least a year. The resilience of the financial 
system is demonstrated by its ability to 
provide financial services during large 
economic and financial shocks such as the 
COVID-19 pandemic.
Progress against SFA 3 and the report on prudential 
regulation: pages 23 and 60 respectively.
Governor’s 
message
DELIVERING THE 
SARB STRATEGY
Globally, it has been a year of 
extraordinary change. 
The ‘great election year’ of 2024 saw 
voters in 64 countries, including South 
Africa, heading to the polls – with 
some remarkable results. Domestically, 
our election ushered in a new era of 
coalition politics, reflecting the maturity 
of our democracy but also presenting 
new uncertainties and opportunities. 
14 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Economic overview
The global environment has changed significantly with a 
prolonged period of globalisation and integration that has 
given way to acute trade tensions. Conditions remain highly 
uncertain, making it difficult to guess how the dust will settle. 
However, it seems highly probable that global conditions will 
be less benign than before, with worse growth prospects 
and heightened geopolitical risks. 
In this context, it matters more than ever that we get our 
domestic policies right. Unfortunately, we are still struggling 
to escape our protracted growth stagnation. The economy 
expanded by only 0.5% last year. The sovereign debt burden 
has yet to stabilise. Until we achieve debt sustainability and 
improve growth, South Africa remains vulnerable. 
We do, however, have significant strengths we can rely on. 
Our floating exchange rate regime, consolidated over a 
quarter of a century, is well-suited to managing volatile 
global conditions, absorbing shocks and supporting our 
competitiveness in foreign markets. Our inflation targeting 
framework is also effective in protecting the value of the 
rand. Last year, headline inflation averaged 4.4%, just below 
the midpoint of our 3–6% target range. It is likely to be 
below 4% this year. Underlying measures of inflation also 
appear to be contained. While risks to the outlook remain, 
there can be little doubt that inflation has been brought back 
under control for now. 
The same is not true everywhere. Although price pressures 
have  generally eased since the shocks of 2021 and 2022, 
inflation remains elevated in many economies. For instance, 
in the United States (US), inflation has been above target  
for 51 months and counting, since 2021. The United 
Kingdom (UK) is at 45 months and the euro area is at 44.  
Brazil has seen inflation above target for 53 months, and 
India for 47 months. In contrast, South Africa was above  
the 4.5% target midpoint for 39 months, between April 2021 
and August 2024.
The main concern with South African inflation is not our 
ability to hit the target. Rather, it is that our target is high 
compared to other countries. For this reason, despite our 
success in stabilising inflation, the price level is almost 20% 
higher than it was in 2021. 
Although an inflation rate of 4.5% may seem moderate, it 
still causes prices to double every 16 years. This is hard to 
reconcile with our constitutional obligation to safeguard the 
value of the currency. For this reason, we continue to make 
the case for a lower target, one that aligns with 
international peers and promotes price stability. 
Strategy
This year, the SARB concluded its five-year strategy cycle 
and launched the next iteration – Strategy 2030. In crafting 
this strategy, we have reflected deeply on the current 
landscape and the challenges we might face in future. The 
headline change is that we have streamlined our strategic 
focus areas (SFAs) to three core responsibilities: price 
stability, financial stability and payments and recognise the 
strong interconnections between these areas. Additionally, 
we aim to enhance our efforts to modernise South Africa’s 
payments landscape, which we discuss further on. 
Supporting our strategic priorities are several enablement 
focus areas (EFAs) that help us build an organisation 
capable of delivering on the strategy. For Strategy 2030 we 
have identified four EFAs: embedding coordinated 
policymaking, enhancing public trust in the SARB through 
communication and engagement, leveraging the use of 
data and technology, and building a future-fit workforce. 
Over time, many organisations suffer from an excess of 
strategic initiatives and objectives. I am therefore pleased 
that we have streamlined our initiatives from five SFAs to 
three and from five EFAs to four. We are a large institution, 
but we are focused.
Financial stability and prudential 
regulation
Despite facing many challenges, our financial system 
remains robust. To nurture this resilience we engage in 
prudential supervision at the level of individual institutions, 
implement macroprudential policies to safeguard the entire 
system and provide deposit insurance to guarantee 
depositors’ funds, thereby maintaining their confidence in 
the financial system. 
Our newest initiative is deposit insurance, with CODI 
recently marking its first anniversary. We have yet to use 
CODI to reimburse depositors, but the capability to do so 
is in place.
Protecting depositors also means occasionally intervening 
to enforce regulations and uphold our regulatory objectives. 
 While risks to the 
outlook remain, there 
can be little doubt that 
inflation has been 
brought back under 
control for now. 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   15 

Delivering the SARB strategy   |   Governor’s message continued
In this context, our Prudential Authority has taken several 
enforcement actions against regulated institutions over the 
past year. The PA also continues to monitor the progress of 
remedial measures implemented by these regulated entities. 
Lastly, we are closely monitoring financial technology (fintech) 
developments. In particular, we are paying close attention to 
artificial intelligence (AI) in the financial sector and evaluating 
the potential risks and rewards it poses. 
Payments
An efficient and reliable payments infrastructure is crucial for 
any modern economy. 
Various emerging-market central banks, most prominently in 
Brazil and India, have made rapid progress in developing fast, 
affordable, accessible and safe digital payments at the retail 
level. This has provided citizens with an attractive alternative 
to cash. Through our Payments Ecosystem Modernisation 
(PEM) project, we aim to emulate the successes of our peer 
countries. 
At the heart of this initiative is a new national payments utility, 
which would provide the fundamental infrastructure for 
processing digital retail payments. This utility would operate 
on a not-for-profit basis and serve all South Africans, 
including those who might otherwise be excluded from the 
digital payments revolution. As part of this effort, we intend to 
make a significant investment in BankservAfrica, an 
automated clearing house in Johannesburg. 
Our aspiration is not to crowd out the private sector in the 
payments space, but rather to build better underlying 
infrastructure which will crowd in investment and innovation 
by both traditional and challenger firms. To encourage this, 
we are also undertaking regulatory reforms so that payments 
activities, such as holding cash balances in e-wallets, will not 
require a banking licence.
Balance sheet
Our balance sheet has strengthened over the past year. On 
the asset side, our foreign exchange reserves have grown 
further, measured in both rand and US dollar terms. This has 
been driven primarily by rising gold prices. 
Our equity position is also stronger than it was before, 
reflecting the transfers we received from last year’s balance 
sheet reforms. We will continue to maintain prudent buffers to 
ensure policy solvency, allowing us to fulfil our mandates 
without financial concerns.
SARB leadership
Last year, we welcomed Mampho Modise as the new 
Deputy Governor, while DGs Rashad Cassim and Fundi 
Tshazibana as well as myself had our terms renewed. This 
leadership continuity has provided the SARB with stability 
during a turbulent period for the economy. 
On 1 April 2025, we also welcomed Khutjo Mabetwa as 
our new Chief Operating Officer, replacing Pradeep 
Maharaj who is now leading our PEM programme within 
the Executive Management Department.
International
Our international responsibilities are reaching a crescendo 
this year with South Africa presiding over the Group of 
Twenty (G20). The SARB, along with National Treasury, is 
steering the G20 Finance Track, working diligently to 
advance our priorities and sustain international economic 
coordination, despite the challenging international 
environment. 
Although it is undoubtedly a difficult time to lead the G20, 
our efforts are well-regarded by the members, who all 
agree on and appreciate at least one subject: the beauty of 
our country, the hospitality of our people and the warmth 
of our welcome. 
Outreach
To better serve our stakeholders, the SARB conducts a 
variety of outreach initiatives. Last year, we engaged with 
approximately 6 500 members of the public through direct, 
in-person events, along with many more who accessed our 
digital content. We particularly focus on high school 
learners and university students, people who are learning 
about our society and the economy and who may also 
consider pursuing a career at the SARB. 
Many people in our society still have limited knowledge 
about the SARB or misunderstand its role, and we aim to 
change that with continuous and accessible 
communications. We serve the people of South Africa and 
the better everyone understands our role, the better they 
can engage us and defend us from threats.
Our people
At the SARB, we thrive on knowledge: our expertise 
powers our mandates. For the past five years, we have 
embraced hybrid ways of working, with some staff 
members working together at our temporary premises in 
16 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25

Irene Link and many others working from home. This year, 
as our Head Office renovation nears completion, we will 
return to working in-person most of the time. As the 
beacon of Pretoria’s central business district, the 
renovated Head Office will ensure a future-fit workspace 
for decades to come.
I look forward to walking the floors again, greeting 
long-standing staff and welcoming new members. I am 
also excited about the unplanned, serendipitous 
encounters that happen when people share a workspace. 
These interactions are so important for nurturing 
understanding and innovation. Spending more time 
together will make us a stronger organisation.
Conclusion
The world is changing. Sadly, it appears to be moving 
towards a more fragmented and less growth-friendly state 
compared to what we have experienced over the past 
three decades or so. South Africa has had it easy during 
this time, but for most of those years, the environment 
was favourable to our country and economy, supporting 
demand for our exports, advancing our productivity 
through technology and facilitating investment through 
capital flows. A less open, prosperous and tolerant world 
order will present profound challenges to our society. 
As predictability becomes an ever-scarcer resource, the 
SARB’s role in providing stability is more crucial than ever. 
Fortunately, the SARB remains robust. With record foreign 
exchange reserves, a superior inflation performance and a 
solid capital position, we are well-equipped to anchor the 
economy. This alone won’t be sufficient to achieve 
balanced and sustainable growth as outlined in our 
constitutional mandate, but it is the right place to start.
It is a privilege to serve one’s country and doing it well is 
deeply fulfilling. The SARB is a remarkable institution. The 
Board, Deputy Governors and staff can be proud of what 
they do for the people of South Africa
. 
E L (Lesetja) Kganyago
Governor of the SARB
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   17 

Connecting past 
successes to future 
opportunities
The 2024/25 financial year signals 
the end of the SARB’s Strategy 2025 
and sets the stage for Strategy 2030. 
More than two years of Strategy 
2025’s cycle were impacted by the 
COVID-19 pandemic and its effects 
are still noticeable today. These past 
five years have been transformative 
and challenging for the SARB. The 
conclusion of this strategy cycle 
offers an opportunity to evaluate our 
performance, celebrate our 
successes and pinpoint areas for 
improvement.
Throughout this period, the SARB’s objectives were guided by 
its five SFAs and five EFAs. The SARB reviewed and improved 
the monetary policy implementation framework (MPIF), 
reformed interest rate benchmarks and extended the 
measurement and analysis of the economy. Headline inflation 
remained within the 3–6% target range, or below it, for  
22 consecutive months, with the recent print of 2.7% in 
March 2025.
The financial system remained resilient, with most supervised 
institutions liquid and well-capitalised or undertaking corrective 
action. There were no major systemic events requiring 
resolution. Key achievements include the operationalisation of 
CODI, the designation of the SARB as Resolution Authority 
and significant progress on the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF) action items, with potential delisting from the greylist by 
October 2025.
The SARB’s efforts to modernise the NPS gained momentum 
with the successful migration of both the domestic and 
regional real-time gross settlement (RTGS) systems to new 
global messaging standards. On the currency front, the SARB 
achieved a 100% on-time, in-full fulfilment rate for currency 
orders from the cash industry, reduced counterfeiting rates to 
3.16 parts per million (ppm) from 5.18 ppm in 2020/21, and 
released a new and optimised banknote and coin series.
 Delivering the SARB strategy   |   Connecting past successes to future opportunities
18 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25

We are ready to begin a new journey with the 
launch of Strategy 2030. This new strategy cycle 
will guide us through the complex and ever-
changing financial landscape. The experiences 
gained from Strategy 2025 will enhance our 
approach to Strategy 2030, ensuring we build on 
past successes while embracing future challenges 
and opportunities.
Looking ahead:
Embracing Strategy 2030
Surveys conducted in 2019, 2022 and 2024 
indicate that stakeholders continue to hold a 
favourable view of the SARB.
The SARB’s cross-departmental research efforts 
led to improved collaboration, increased research 
capacity and the publication of several papers on 
financial stability and the impacts of financial 
regulations.
The SARB’s Information Technology (IT) Strategy 
was approved and its cybersecurity posture 
enhanced to protect its systems and data. The 
SARB continued to develop critical skills and 
improve its culture, leadership and trust indicators, 
supported by the hybrid work adoption and 
diversity and inclusion (D&I) programmes.
          Strategy 2030
Strategy 2030 will be 
underpinned by three 
core responsibilities:
As we transition to Strategy 2030, we are committed to tackling the challenges and seizing the opportunities that lie ahead, 
ensuring that the SARB continues to be a trusted and effective institution.
 
SFA 1
EFA 1 EFA 2 EFA 3 EFA 4
SFA 2 SFA 3
Maintaining price 
stability: Maintaining a 
trusted store of value and 
ensuring the stability of the 
currency.
Promoting 
financial stability: 
Safeguarding the stability of 
the financial system and 
resolving crises when 
necessary.
Serving as 
custodian of the 
NPS:
 Operating a 
resilient, effective and 
accessible payment 
system.
Deliver low and 
stable inflation
Embed 
coordinated 
policymaking
Enhance public 
trust in the SARB 
through 
communication 
and engagement
Leverage the 
use of data and 
technology
Build a future-fit 
workforce
Safeguard the 
stability of the 
financial system
Enhance the resilience, 
effectiveness and 
accessibility of payments
To achieve these objectives, we have three strategic focus areas:
To enable the successful execution of these SFAs, 
we will prioritise four enablement focus areas:
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   19 

Delivering the SARB strategy   |   Connecting past successes to future opportunities continued
Target met Target not metTarget partially metNote: The status of an SFA is determined by the measures in 
its scorecard and not the achievement of its unique objectives.
Cross-cutting 
themes
Organisational 
capability
Strategy 2025: How we achieved price and financial stability
How we enabled our strategic objectives
Stakeholder value proposition
SFA 1 SFA 2 SFA 3
Maintain headline 
inflation within the  
target range
Maximise  
monetary policy 
effectiveness
Anchor  
inflation 
expectations
Protect and 
enhance financial 
stabilityEnhance  
the SARB’s ability to 
respond to shocks 
and systemic events
Assess  
risks and 
vulnerabilities in 
the financial 
system
Develop  
and propose 
possible mitigating 
options
Broaden  
access to  
payment services 
while promoting 
the safety, 
efficiency and 
integrity of the 
NPS
Enhance   
risk-based, 
outcomes-focused 
and forward-
looking supervision
Implement  
integrated and 
proportional 
regulatory and 
supervisory 
frameworks
Improve  
regulatory  
coverage
Improve  
the monitoring, 
reporting and 
surveillance of 
cross-border 
transactions
Improve  
the monitoring of 
existing and  
emerging 
vulnerabilities
Enhance  
the functioning of 
South Africa’s 
financial system
Enhance the 
macroeconomic  
and 
macroprudential 
toolkit
Optimise  
the currency 
supply chain
Enhance  
the integrity of 
banknotes  
and coin
Objectives unique to each SFA
Improve transparency 
and accountability through 
stakeholder engagement 
and communication
Improve  
strategy execution  
and internal efficiency
Attract, develop  and retain 
critical skills and competencies 
and embed the SARB culture
EFA 1
EFA 4
EFA 5
Coordinate 
policymaking 
and 
implementation
EFA 2
Optimise,  
integrate and leverage 
information and 
technology solutions
EFA 3
Promote and 
enhance the safety, 
soundness and 
integrity of regulated 
financial institutions 
and market 
infrastructures
SFA 4
Enhance South 
Africa’s resilience to 
external shocks
SFA 5
Ensure cost 
effective availability 
and integrity of 
currency
20 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25

Unique strategic objectives for  SFA  1
Maximise monetary  
policy effectiveness
• The SARB published a range of peer -reviewed research papers including, 
17 working papers, 20 economic notes, 18 research briefs and one  
Special Occasional Bulletin of Economic Notes which informed monetary 
policy thinking. 
•
 In addition, four published editions of the 
Quarterly Bulletin provided timely 
analysis of economic trends. 
•
 High-quality documents wer
e prepared for six MPC meetings, 
supplemented by two in-depth background notes about labour statistics 
and public finance considerations. 
•
 Additionally, two editions of the 
Monetary Policy Review (MPR) were 
published, providing monetary policy insights and analysis.
Anchor inflation 
expectations
• The Bureau for Economic Research’s five-year-ahead inflation expectations 
declined to 4.9% in the second quarter of 2024, marking the first time it has 
fallen below the 5% threshold since the fourth quarter of 2021.
• Notably, analysts’ expectations have converged towards the midpoint of the 
target range, while labour and business expectations remain above, at 5.2%  
and 5.1% respectively.
• A process is underway to develop an engagement approach with key price-
setters, encompassing both administered price-setters and other stakeholders.
Performance scorecard Overall status
Strategic measures Target (annual) 2024/25 (annual) 2023/24 (annual)
Headline inflation  
versus target 3–6%
4.4%
(2024 calendar year)
3.8%
(financial year)
6%
(2023 calendar year)
5.5%
(financial year)
2024/25 Performance 
overview
Headline inflation remained within 
the 3–6% target range, or below 
it, for 22 consecutive months as 
of March 2025. The SARB 
forecasts inflation remaining 
within the target range, at 
3.2% in 2025, 4.2% in 2026  
and 4.4% in 2027.
SFA 1
Maintain headline inflation within the 
target range
Objectives
Maintain headline inflation within the target range of 3–6% by 
delivering a structured research programme, economic analysis 
and policy advice. This is supported by an effective MPIF, 
strong information management and targeted communication 
and stakeholder engagement.
Target met Target not metTarget partially met
Note: The strategic plan reports headline inflation for the 2024/25 financial year (April 2024 to March 2025).
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   21 

Delivering the SARB strategy   |   Governor’s message continued
Unique strategic objectives for  SFA  2
Enhance the SARB’s 
ability to respond to 
shocks and systemic 
events
In response to improving our handling of shocks and systemic events, significant progress 
was made:
• Financial loss absorbing capacity (Flac) requirements were issued and the proposed 
standards will be tabled for approval in the 2025/26 fiscal year.
• Resolution strategies were developed for two of the six systemically important financial 
institutions (SIFIs), with the remaining four strategies still in development.
• A high-level strategy for non-SIFIs was developed and is in the process of being finalised.
• Detailed resolution strategies were drafted for two distressed banks, while two other 
strategies are still being developed.
Assess risks and 
vulnerabilities in the 
financial system
Progress includes:
• Submission of a Non-Bank Financial Institution Framework to the Financial Stability 
Committee (FSC).
• Successful completion of the first insurance common scenario stress test and delivery of 
the climate risk stress test (CRST) top down model for use in climate risk stress testing.
Develop and propose 
possible mitigating 
options
• High-level frameworks for monitoring and assessing financial stability, including available 
tools, were approved and published as part of the mitigation strategies.
Broaden access to 
payment services while 
promoting the safety, 
efficiency and integrity 
of the NPS
• A draft Domestic Interoperability Consultation Paper was distributed to stakeholders  
for feedback.
• A directive on screen-scraping was issued, marking a key milestone in the development 
of open banking regulations. 
• A draft Open Banking Regulatory Framework is being reviewed internally.
• The Cyber Resilience Directive was published and the Prudential Framework has been 
completed and incorporated into the Payment Authorisation Framework. This framework 
will be open for public consultation once it is finalised.
2024/25 Performance overview
Inaugural stress-testing exercises were conducted for the insurance 
sector as well as for climate change-related risks in the banking 
sector. Several financial stability indicators which assess the overall 
health of financial conditions within the economy, such as the 
Financial Conditions Index (FCI), the heatmap and the Residual 
Vulnerability Matrix (RVM) were updated to ensure they remain 
appropriate for the domestic environment.
CODI, a subsidiary of the SARB mandated to protect qualifying 
bank depositors in the unlikely event of their bank failing, became 
operational on 1 April 2024.
Notable progress was also made in broadening access to the NPS. 
The prudential and risk management framework, including cyber 
resilience, for the NPS was drafted and incorporated into the 
Payments Authorisation Framework. Additionally, a draft Domestic 
Interoperability Consultation Paper was circulated to key external 
stakeholders and regulatory bodies.
Performance scorecard Overall status
Strategic measures Target (annual) 2024/25 (annual)
Protect and enhance  
financial stability
Comprehensive set of 
documented frameworks that 
guide how the SARB fullfills 
its financial stability 
responsibilities.
Sectoral frameworks, including the 
Macroprudential Policy Framework, the Financial 
Stability Monitoring and Assessment Framework 
and the revised FCI were approved and 
published.
SFA 2
Protect and enhance  
financial stability
Objectives
Continue developing macroprudential  
frameworks with a greater emphasis  
on stress-testing to assess their  
effectiveness. Modernise the NPS,  
ensuring its safety and efficiency.
Delivering the SARB strategy   |   Connecting past successes to future opportunities continued
22 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25

2024/25 Performance 
overview
Significant progress has been made in 
complying with quantitative prudential 
standards for SIFIs and other 
institutions. Compliance with 
governance and risk management 
practices has also been achieved or 
surpassed. There was also notable 
progress made in implementing 
remedial actions to address greylisting, 
with two remaining action items 
expected to be completed between 
March and June 2025, potentially 
leading to delisting in October 2025.
1 Non-SIFIs: smaller banks or small- to medium-sized insur ers.
Performance scorecard Overall status
Strategic measures Target (annual)
2024/25 
(annual)
2023/24 
(annual)
Percentage of financial institutions 
that meet or exceed the quantitative 
prudential standards for SIFIs
100%
or under adequate  
regulatory action
100% 100%
Weighted percentage of financial 
institutions that meet or exceed the 
quantitative prudential standards for 
non-SIFIs
90%
or under adequate 
regulatory action
98% 96.9%
Compliance with sound 
governance and risk management 
practices for SIFIs (proportionate 
application of smaller banks and 
co-operative financial institutions)
100%
of institutions fully  
compliant or under  
adequate regulatory 
action
100% 100%
Weighted percentage of non-SIFIs1 
that comply with sound governance 
and risk management practices 
required by legislation
100%
of institutions fully  
compliant or under  
adequate regulatory 
action
99% 96.4%
SFA 3
Promote and enhance the safety, 
soundness and integrity of 
regulated financial institutions and 
market infrastructures
Objectives
Embed the PA’s enhanced regulatory and supervisory 
practices and promote a proactive approach with 
appropriate policies, frameworks and tools to support 
the evolving financial ecosystem and improve financial 
surveillance.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   23 

Delivering the SARB strategy   |   Connecting past successes to future opportunities continued
Unique strategic objectives for  SFA  3
Enhance risk-based, 
outcomes-focused and 
forward-looking 
supervision
•  The 2024/25 Quality Assurance plan on compliance to supervisory guidelines 
was executed and finalised. The outcomes indicate a positive trend in the 
adoption of supervisory guidelines across the PA.
 
Implement integrated 
and proportionate 
regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks
• Field testing on the capital standards for financial conglomerates was concluded.
• A business risk assessment guidance note on anti-money laundering and 
countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) supervision was approved and 
published in November 2024.
• The FATF Plenary concluded that South Africa successfully addressed or largely 
addressed 20 out of the 22 action items in its Action Plan during the reporting 
cycle. All items relating to the SARB have been removed from the action list. The 
remaining two items are anticipated to be addressed between March and June 
2025.
2
Improve regulatory 
coverage
• Four guidance notes on climate-related disclosures, governance and risk 
practices for banks and insurers were published.
• Among the reports were one summarising the feedback from public 
consultation, a climate risk observation report and the PA Climate Roadmap 
2024–26. 
• A draft consolidated implementation plan for assessing the adequacy of the 
prudential regulatory framework for collective investment schemes (CISs) and 
pension funds is currently undergoing consultations.
Improve the monitoring, 
reporting and surveillance 
of cross-border 
transactions
• Sixty-five percent of financial institutions meet the Financial Surveillance 
requirements for completeness and accuracy of cross-border transactions, while 
the rest are under specific regulatory actions due to non-compliance.
• All Authorised Dealers adhere to macroprudential requirements.
• Additionally, 98.82% of institutional investors are fully compliant with prudential 
requirements, with the other 1.18% investors under supervisory intervention due 
to non-compliance.
2  The SARB Annual Report  was finalised before the June FATF meeting. Developments on the final 
two action list items will be reflected in the 2025/26 annual report.
Target met Target not metTarget partially met
24 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25

2024/25 Performance overview
Strategies for FX reserve accumulation have been 
developed and approved, and a re-assessment of 
the adequacy of the current level of reserves has 
been completed. Furthermore, the implementation 
of a Market Tracker and Ticker, development of a 
visualisation tool for post-trade analytics, reporting 
instructions for approved dealers and the creation 
of business cases and architectural designs have 
been completed.
Performance scorecard Overall status
Strategic measures Target (annual) 2024/25 (annual) 2023/24 (annual)
Investment grade 
credit rating
An investment 
grade credit rating 
from at least one of 
the major rating 
agencies
December 2024 – Moody’s affirmed 
the sovereign’s long-term foreign and 
local currency debt ratings at ‘Ba2’ 
and maintained a stable outlook.
March 2022 –  
Moody’s changed South 
Africa’s outlook to stable, 
affirming its Ba2 rating.
November 2024 – S&P Global 
Ratings affirmed its BB- rating,  
with a positive outlook.
March 2023 – S&P revised 
South Africa’s outlook to 
stable as infrastructure 
constraints weighed on 
growth and affirmed its 
‘BB-/B’  rating.
September 2024 – Fitch affirmed 
South Africa’s long-term foreign and 
local currency debt ratings at ‘BB-’ 
and maintained the stable outlook.
January 2024 – Fitch affirmed 
South Africa’s domestic and 
foreign debt ratings to ‘BB-’,  
with a stable outlook.
Ratio of imports of 
goods, services 
and income 
payments covered 
by reserves
Reserves equal to 
at least six months 
of imports of goods 
and services
5.4 months (2024Q3) –
Assessing 
Reserve Adequacy 
(ARA) metric 
measures a 
broad set of 
risks reflecting 
potential drains 
on the balance of 
payments
ARA between 100% 
and 150% 93% (2024) –
 
SFA 4
Enhance South Africa’s resilience 
to external shocks
Objectives
Improve the monitoring of existing and emerging 
external financial and macroeconomic risks and 
vulnerabilities, continue to enhance the functioning of 
the financial system, enhance macroeconomic and 
macroprudential toolkits and improve the coordination 
of policy responses within the SARB and with NT.
Target met Target not metTarget partially met
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   25 

Delivering the SARB strategy   |   Connecting past successes to future opportunities continued
Unique strategic objectives for  SFA  4
Improve the  
monitoring of  
existing and  
emerging  
vulnerabilities
• The FX Monitoring Tool was implemented and achieved its milestones such as 
the completion of the Market Tracker and Ticker and the customisation work for 
pre-trade data.
• A visualisation tool for post-trade analytics was completed.
Enhance the 
functioning of  
South Africa’s  
financial system
• The proof of concept (PoC) for the Triparty Collateral Management system will be 
integrated into the South African Multiple Option Settlement (SAMOS) version 9 
upgrade programme.
• To enhance access to the Global Financial Safety Net, the SARB continued 
discussions with the BIS on this issue.
• In finalising the Climate Change Regulatory Framework Position Paper, a climate 
change policy and regulatory framework has been incorporated into the National 
Payment System Consultation Paper.
Enhance the 
macroeconomic and 
macroprudential toolkit
• Various strategies have been developed for accumulating FX reserves.
• Additionally, a re-assessment of the adequacy of the current level of reserves 
has been completed and a ‘ready-to-execute’ proposal will be finalised.
Target met Target not metTarget partially met
26 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25

Unique strategic objectives for  SFA  5
2024/25 Performance overview
The strategic goal of ensuring 100% 
on-time, in-full availability of currency 
for the cash industry was met. The 
integrity of the currency, indicated by a 
counterfeiting rate of 3.16 ppm, 
remained well below the 12 ppm 
threshold. The currency-producing 
subsidiaries met the targets set for 
managing the unit cost of production of 
banknotes and coin.
Performance scorecard Overall status
Strategic measures Target (annual) 2024/25 (annual) 2023/24 (annual)
On-time, in-full fulfilment of 
orders from the cash industry
100%
orders fulfilled on time 100% 100%
Incidence of counterfeiting 
measured in ppm (annualised)
<12 ppm
or under adequate 
regulatory action
3.16 ppm 4.03 ppm
Optimise the  
currency supply chain
• The cost-of-currency supply chain, including operational and personnel costs, 
remained within budget at the currency-producing subsidiaries.
• Banknote buffer levels remained above the nine-month target.
• Similarly, coin buffer stocks surpassed the six-month target due to the inventory 
needed for the third decimal coin withdrawal strategy and a decrease in the 
demand for certain high-denomination coins.
Enhance the quality  
of banknotes and coin • At 75%, the yield of fit banknotes in circulation was achieved. 
SFA 5
Ensure cost effective availability 
and integrity of currency
Objectives
Ensure the availability of high-quality banknotes and 
coin and combat counterfeiting.
Target met Target not metTarget partially met
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   27 

Delivering the SARB strategy   |   Connecting past successes to future opportunities continued
EFA 1 
Improve transparency and 
accountability through stakeholder 
engagement and communication
  
2024/25 Performance highlights
Delivered layered communication initiatives 
targeting diverse audiences across various 
platforms. According to the 2023/24 Ipsos 
survey findings, the SARB’s public reputation 
has improved compared to the 2022 survey. 
However, some metrics, such as public 
awareness, saw slight declines. The next 
survey will be conducted in the 2025/26 
financial year.
EFA 3 
Optimise, integrate and leverage information 
and technology solutions 
2024/25 Performance highlights
The SARB continues to update its core central banking 
systems and is in the process of establishing an enterprise 
information management system, focused on improving 
information-sharing both within the SARB and across the 
industry to build an advanced analytics capability.
The PoC for Advanced Analytics and use case models for the 
PA, National Payment System Department (NPSD) and 
Financial Markets Department (FMD) have been finalised. A 
data-sharing strategy has also been approved.
Progress has been made in delivering of Tier 1 programmes. 
Several of these programmes will continue into the new 
strategy cycle, with an emphasis on speeding up their delivery.
An Information Governance Maturity Model has been rolled 
out across departments in the SARB, including among others 
CODI, Corporate Services Department, Currency Management 
Department and Group Securities Management Department.
Phase 2 of the Electronic Documents and Records 
Management System (EDRMS) programme is currently 
underway and the digitisation of records is progressing well.
EFA 2 
Coordinate policymaking and 
implementation
2024/25 Performance highlights
 
The Cross Departmental Research 
Committee sets a Bank-wide research 
agenda. The SARB published papers from 
the call for proposals on the impacts of 
financial regulation. The call attracted both 
local and international interest, resulting in the 
approval of 17 research proposals.
Eight working papers discussing key topics 
in financial stability and two on financial 
inclusion were published in a special March 
2025 issue of the South African Journal  
of Economics.
Good progress has been made on climate 
change initiatives and collaborations with 
the Network for Greening the Financial 
System (NGFS) and the Southern African 
Development Community (SADC) Committee 
of Central Bank Governors (CCBG).
Enablement focus areas
28 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25

Target met Target not metTarget partially met
EFA 4 
Improve strategy execution and  
internal efficiency
 
2024/25 Performance highlights
Project, programme and portfolio management initiatives 
were rolled out across the SARB.
To drive the maturity of enterprise-level strategy 
management with a focus on enterprise change 
management, specialised change capability programmes 
were developed and delivered. A change management 
resilience programme aimed at employees was also piloted.
EFA 5 
Attract, develop and retain critical skills and 
competencies and embed the SARB culture
 
2024/25 Performance highlights
Departmental strategic workforce action plans, which focus 
on critical skills development through learning pathways 
and skills hubs, are still closely monitored.
Turnover rates of both regrettable losses and critical 
skills remain within acceptance thresholds, though some 
concerns persist in a few departments.
The Ways of Work programme continues to support 
hybrid working arrangements. The D&I programme, now 
in Phase 4, focused on embedding inclusivity as a core 
element of the culture of the SARB.
Various webinars and workshops have been conducted 
to strengthen the SARB culture and foster personal, 
team and leadership effectiveness. These interventions 
have contributed to an overall improvement in employee 
engagement, which rose from 70.9% to 72.2% in the 2024 
Employee Engagement Survey.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   29 

How the SARB is governed   |   Governance continued
The SARB’s shareholders
As at 31 March 2025, the SARB 
had 843 shareholders. These 
shareholders do not have any 
rights or involvement in 
determining monetary policy, 
financial stability policy or the 
regulation and supervision of the 
financial sector.
 
Their rights are limited to the following activities at 
the SARB’s AGM:
• reviewing the SARB’s annual financial statements;
• electing seven non-executive directors of the Board 
when vacancies arise; and
• appointing the external auditors and approving their 
remuneration.
SARB shares are traded on an over-the-counter (OTC) 
share-trading facility managed by the organisation. 
Although some foreigners still hold shares, only the 
shareholders residing in South Africa are entitled to vote  
at the AGM.
Shareholders are allowed one vote for every 200 shares 
held. The SARB Act restricts shareholders to owning no 
more than 10 000 shares, including shares held by 
associates, as defined in the SARB Act. 
Shareholding 
and dividend 
Dividend
The SARB Act permits the SARB 
to declare dividends at the rate of 
10% a year on the paid-up share 
capital of the SARB. An interim 
dividend of five cents per share 
was paid to shareholders on  
25 October 2024. A final dividend 
of five cents per share was paid to 
shareholders on 30 May 2025. 
The total dividend paid for the 
financial year was R0.2 million 
(2023/24: R0.2 million).
HOW THE SARB 
IS GOVERNED
30 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   31 
Governance
The SARB embraces the 
overarching goals of King IV™ 
and has implemented the 
principles of responsibility, 
accountability, fairness and 
appropriate transparency, in line 
with legislation governing the 
SARB.
Ethical culture
The SARB operates in the public interest, making it 
critical to uphold the highest ethical standards as an 
institution. The Board and executive management are 
responsible for ensuring that the SARB fulfils its mandate 
and executes its strategy, all while adhering to its core 
values of integrity, excellence, respect and trust, open 
communication and accountability. Any challenge to the 
SARB’s independence and constitutional mandate is 
vigorously defended to ensure that the SARB serves 
South Africa’s citizens without fear, favour or prejudice.
The SARB promotes a culture of ethical conduct and 
compliance. The Ethics Policy and procedures guard 
against unethical behaviour or unlawful conduct and 
guide management in the event of such instances 
occurring. The Board Risk and Ethics Committee (BREC) 
oversees ethics management, while the Risk 
Management and Compliance Department (RMCD) 
manages the day-to-day aspects, including ethics risk 
assessments and employee declarations on outside 
interests, gifts, hospitality and personal account trading. 
The Internal Audit function assists in identifying possible 
incidents of commercial crime and other irregularities.
The annual Employee Engagement Survey is used to 
gain employee insight on ethics. In the 2024 survey, the 
SARB noted improvements in several key leadership 
drivers, with an overall improvement of 1.3 percentage 
points from 70.9% to 72.2%. The inclusion of the newly 
added engagement driver of well-being boosted the 
score to 72.4%, helping the SARB to retain the Deloitte’s 
Platinum Seal of Achievement – the highest recognition 
for employee engagement.
Based on the independent Ethics Management Maturity 
and Ethics Risk Assessments conducted in 2023, the 
SARB has developed an ethics management strategy 
and an ethics disclosure system. It also updated its 
Ethics Policy.
An independent, external hotline is available to 
employees and the public to anonymously report 
dishonest, questionable or sensitive matters related to 
the SARB’s business practices. This hotline is available 
24/7 and all allegations are treated seriously and 
investigated. Callers can communicate with trained 
operators in English, Afrikaans, isiZulu and Sesotho.

32 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
How the SARB is governed   |   Governance continued
The Board is responsible for the corporate governance of 
the SARB. It ensures compliance with principles of good 
governance, adopts rules and determines policies for the 
sound accounting, administration and functioning of the 
SARB. It also ensures these functions and duties are 
fulfilled. The SARB Act and the Board Charter define the 
Board’s responsibilities.
The SARB Act requires the Board to have 15 members, 
comprising the Governor, three deputy governors who 
serve as executive directors and four non-executive 
directors appointed by the President after consultation with 
the Minister of Finance. It also includes seven shareholder-
elected non-executive directors.
The SARB Act also sets the ‘fit and proper’ criteria for 
Board membership and prescribes that a panel evaluates 
nominated shareholder-elected candidates, considering 
skills, knowledge and diversity. This ensures that the Board 
operates with integrity and has the capability and diverse 
thinking required to fulfil its responsibility for effective 
governance. Well-constituted committees assist the Board 
in discharging its duties.
The Board receives reports on governance and oversight 
matters from the GEC and the various Board committees. 
The Board ordinarily meets five times a year. Of specific 
note is the Board’s accountability for the governance of 
information and technology (I&T), which includes ensuring 
that the I&T strategy supports the SARB’s strategic 
objectives. I&T investments are made within acceptable 
risk parameters and in line with the SARB’s culture, 
structure and I&T maturity. Various governance structures 
assist the Board in this responsibility. I&T performance 
against an approved scorecard is reported quarterly to the 
Information and Technology Steering Committee, GEC, 
BREC and Audit Committee.
E L (LESETJA) KGANYAGO I 59
Executive chairperson  •  Governor of the SARB 1 
Appointed by the President
Appointed: 9 November 2014, reappointed for a 
second and third five-year terms on 9 November 2019 
and 9 November 2024 respectively. 
Responsibilities: Executive Management Department, 
Communications Division, Strategy Management Office 
(SMO), IAD, Economic Research Department (ERD) and 
the Human Capital and Operations Cluster.
Experience: Served as Director-General at NT and then 
as a DG of the SARB from 16 May 2011 to 8 November 
2014. Served as the Chairperson of the International 
Monetary and Financial Committee, the primary advisory 
board to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Board of 
Governors, from 18 January 2018 to 17 January 2021. 
During his time at NT, he represented South Africa at the 
World Bank, the G20 and the African Development Bank 
(AfDB), including as Chair of the Development Committee 
Deputies and Co-chair of the G20 Working Group on the 
reform of the IMF.
1
The Board
Other current roles
• Chairperson of the CCBG of the SADC.
• Co-chairperson of the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) Regional Consultative Group 
for sub-Saharan Africa and the FSB’s Cross-Border Payments Coordination Group.
• Appointed Chancellor of Stellenbosch University in January 2025.
Awards
• University of South Africa (Unisa) Chancellor’s Calabash Outstanding Alumnus 
Award in 2015.
• Named the GlobalMarkets Awards Governor of the Year for sub-Saharan Africa  
in 2017.
• Named Central Bank Governor of the Year by Central Banking Publications  
in 2018.
• Doctor of Commerce, honoris causa, awarded by Stellenbosch University  
in December 2018.
• Leadership in Practice Award in 2019 from Unisa Graduate School  
of Business Leadership.
• Doctor of Commerce, honoris causa, awarded by the Nelson Mandela University  
in December 2020.
• Awarded Central Bank Governor of the Year by African Banker in 2021.
• Doctor of Education, honoris causa, awarded by the Walter Sisulu University 
in 2025.
1    As is practice ar ound the globe the SARB Act requires the Governor to serve as both the CEO of the SARB and Chairperson of the Board, with a casting 
and deliberative vote.
Gender diversity Race diversity
Board composition at 31 March 2025
Board members
15
1
MenWomen
 White Black
2
13
Average age of 
Board members
 
  58.26 years
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   33 
N (NOMFUNDO) TSHAZIBANA I 48
Executive director  •  Deputy Governor of the SARB
Appointed by the President
CEO of the PA from 1 April 2022
Appointed: 1 August 2019, reappointed for a second five-year term on  
1 August 2024 
Responsibilities: SARB Financial Surveillance Department and the PA.
Served as Adviser to the Governors: February 2018 to 31 July 2019
Experience: Prior to joining the SARB, she served as an Alternate 
Executive Director on the Board of the IMF from 2015 to 2018. Served 
as Deputy Director-General responsible for Economic Policy and 
Forecasting at NT from June 2011 to February 2015 and prior to that 
served in various roles at NT from 2003. Before this, she was 
responsible for policy analysis at the National Energy Regulator of 
South Africa (NERSA) and worked in the private sector.
Other current roles
• Member of the Supervisory and Regulatory Committee of the FSB.
• Member of the CODI Board and Chairperson of the CODI Investment 
Committee.
• Vice Chairperson of the NGFS.
R (RASHAD) CASSIM I 59
Executive director  •  Deputy Governor of the SARB
Appointed by the President
Appointed: 1 August 2019, reappointed for a second five-year term on  
1 August 2024 
Responsibilities: FMD, Legal Services Department, International 
Economic Relations and Policy Department and NPSD.
Experience: Served as the Head of the SARB’s ERD and Economic 
Statistics Department (ESD) and as Chief Economist from March 2011 
until July 2019. Before joining the SARB, he was the Deputy Director-
General at Stats SA responsible for economic statistics. From 2003 
until 2006 he was a professor and Head of the School of Economics 
and Business Sciences at the University of the Witwatersrand (Wits). 
Before this, he was the Head of Trade and Industrial Policy Strategies 
and held various research positions at the University of Cape Town 
(UCT). He served as the chairperson of the international Irving Fisher 
Committee on Central Bank Statistics under the auspices of the Bank 
for International Settlements (BIS) between 2019 and 2022.
Other current roles
• Member of the BIS Markets Committee and the Committee on the 
Global Financial System.
• Serves as South Africa’s Central Bank Deputy at the G20 and BRICS 
meetings.
• Chair of the Financial Markets Liaison Group, the Market Practitioners 
Group (MPG).
• Chair of the CPD.
2
3
 DR M M P (MAMPHO) MODISE I 42
Executive director • Deputy Governor of the SARB
Appointed by the President
Appointed: 1 April 2024  
Responsibilities: Financial Stability Cluster, which includes the 
FinStab, CODI, the ESD, the RMCD and the Fintech Unit.
Experience: Served as the Deputy Director-General of Public 
Finance at NT, responsible for fiscal and financing monitoring 
and evaluating policy proposals across national departments. 
Was also responsible for overseeing and assessing the 
performance of public and state-owned entities. Formerly a chief 
director for strategy and risk management at NT’s Asset and 
Liability Management Division, she was responsible for 
implementing a strategy and risk management framework and 
managed the government’s relationships with global rating 
agencies. Her previous roles include Director of Fiscal Policy and 
Senior Economist in the Economic Policy Division at NT. She 
chairs the CODI Board and oversees the successful launch and 
ongoing public engagement of CODI.
Other current roles
• Member of the FSB Standing Committee on Standards 
Implementation.
• Advisory Board member of SA-TIED (Southern Africa).
• Advisory Board member of the Faculty of Economic and 
Management Science, University of Pretoria (UP).
L H (LERATO) MOLEBATSI I 55
Lead independent non-executive director  •  Non-executive 
Directors’ Committee (Nedcom) Chairperson
Government appointed: April 2019, reappointed in June 2022
Qualifications: BA Psychology, University of Johannesburg; 
Senior Executive Leadership Programme for Africa, Harvard 
University; Senior Management Development Programme 
Diploma, Stellenbosch University
Experience: A former CEO of a multinational company, she 
held positions in financial services companies such as Sanlam 
and Old Mutual. While in government she led policy 
development and transformational change initiatives. Has 
worked across the continent with decision-makers of major 
global institutions such as General Electric (GE), while serving as 
the CEO of GE South Africa. Currently serves on several boards 
including as a non-executive director and Chairperson of the 
Social Ethics Environment and Sustainability Committee at Spur 
Corporation. Has over 25 years’ experience in financial services, 
mining, government, non-profit and professional services. Has 
knowledge and skills in policy, strategy, communications, 
marketing, corporate social investment, black economic 
empowerment and governance.
4
5
2
 3
 4
 5
34 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
How the SARB is governed   |   Governance continued
N B (NORMAN) MBAZIMA I 66
Non-executive director  •  Audit Committee Chairperson
Board appointed as a casual vacancy: August 2020
Shareholder elected: August 2021, re-elected in July 2024
Qualifications: Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified 
Accounts as well as the Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants
Experience: Over 18 years’ exposure as a senior executive at Anglo 
American, including as CFO and CEO of its various business units. 
Seventeen years’ experience as a professional accountant with 
Deloitte & Touche, in mining, financial services and other industries. 
Currently the Chairperson of Anglo American Platinum Limited and 
various other boards. Is a trustee of Malaria No More. Has 
knowledge and skills in mining, financial management and 
governance practices in the public and private sectors.
Z (ZOAIB) HOOSEN I 60
Non-executive director  •   BREC Chairperson
Shareholder elected: July 2019, re-elected in 
July 2022
Qualifications: MBA and Bachelor of Science (BSc) in Computer 
Science and Mathematics
Experience: Thirty years’ experience in the information and 
communications technology industry and the former Managing 
Director of Microsoft South Africa. Currently a member of the Gordon 
Institute of Business Science (GIBS) Advisory Board, Institute of 
Directors South Africa and Executive in Residence at Sanari Capital. 
He advises businesses on their strategic and digital transformation 
journeys. Has knowledge and skills in industry.
Y (YVONNE) MUTHIEN I 68
Non-executive director  •   Remuneration Committee (Remco) 
Chairperson
Shareholder elected: July 2018, re-elected in August 2021 and 
again in July 2024 for a final three-year term
Qualifications: DPhil, Oxford University; Master of Arts, 
Northwestern University, US; BA (Hons) – cum laude, University of 
the Western Cape
Experience: Currently Chairperson of Rhodes Food Group, a 
non-executive director of Aspen and SA SME Fund as well as 
Chairperson of Mavovo Capital. Has extensive executive 
management and Board experience across various sectors. Former 
positions include Senior Executive and Board roles at Sanlam, 
Sanlam Investments, Santam, BankservAfrica, Coca-Cola and MTN. 
Has knowledge and skills in commerce and finance, 
telecommunications and fast-moving consumer goods.
96
7
8
N (NICHOLAS) VINK I 70
Non-executive director
Shareholder elected: July 2016, re-elected in July 2019 and again 
in July 2022 for a final three-year term
Qualifications: Doctorate (PhD) in Agricultural Economics
Experience: Non-executive director on the Rooibos Limited Board 
and a former President of the International Association of Agricultural 
Economists (2021–24). Has knowledge and skills in agriculture.
J M S D (DUDU) MSOMI I 54
Non-executive director
Government appointed: July 2020, reappointed in  
September 2023
Qualifications: Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree (Psychology and 
English); BA (Hons) degree (Cultural and Media Studies); 
postgraduate diplomas in Advertising and Marketing and Corporate 
Governance; and a Master of Business Administration (MBA) from 
the UP’s GIBS
Experience: Chairperson of the SARB Retirement Fund Board 
(employer appointed); Founder and CEO of Busara Leadership 
Partners; Host of Wisdom Personified Conversations with Dudu 
Msomi; adjunct faculty member at GIBS; industry expert for 
Masterstart; SA partner for the CEO Summit Uganda’s CEO 
Apprentice Programme; part-time Commissioner on the KwaZulu-
Natal Provincial Planning Commission; a non-executive director of the 
Vodacom Foundation Advisory Board; Trustee of the Humulani Trust 
(Invicta Holdings); and a Fellow at the Institute of Directors in South 
Africa. Has knowledge and skills in strategy, corporate governance, 
environmental, social and governance (ESG) matters, leadership 
development, diversity, equity and inclusion, and small-, micro- and 
medium-sized enterprises.
C B (CHARLOTTE) BUITENDAG I 58
Non-executive director
Shareholder elected: July 2016, re-elected in July 2019 and  
again in July 2022 for a final three-year term
Qualifications: PhD in Econometrics
Experience: Is serving as Professor in Simulation and Futuristic 
Studies at the Thabo Mbeki Graduate School for Public and 
International Affairs, Unisa. Has previously served as Professor  
of Economics at UP . Has knowledge and skills in industry.
9
10
11
8
6
 7
 10
6
9
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   35 
M M T (TRYPHOSA) RAMANO I 53
Non-executive director
Shareholder elected: August 2020, re-elected in July 2023
Qualifications: CA(SA); postgraduate diploma in Accounting and 
Bachelor of Commerce (BCom); Advanced Leadership Initiative 
fellow (2021) at Harvard University, Boston
Experience: Co-founder and Director of Magommake Limited. 
Has held positions in the public and private sectors. Among other 
roles, served as the CFO of PPC Limited, WIPHOLD and South 
African Airways, and as Head of Asset Liability at NT. Serves on 
the boards and as Chairperson of the Audit and Risk Committee of 
the International Women’s Forum (South Africa) and the Solidarity 
Fund. She is a member of the South African Institute of Chartered 
Accountants (SAICA), a non-executive director of the Public 
Investment Corporation (PIC), Denel SOC Limited, Eskom Holdings 
SOC Limited, SA Rugby Council, the current Deputy Chairperson 
of the Council at UP and National Economic Development and 
Labour Council (Nedlac), and a member of the Board of the 
National Transmission Company of SA. Has knowledge and skills in 
commerce and finance.
K H (KGABO) BADIMO I 65
Non-executive director
Government appointed: June 2022
Qualifications: PhD in Information Systems, Unisa; MSc in Data 
Engineering, Keele University in the UK; BSc Computer Sciences, 
University of the North at Turfloop (University of Limpopo); 
Executive Leadership Programme at Unisa; Graduate Studies 
Programme in Business Administration at Wits; and SAP Winning 
Insights Leadership Development Programme at GIBS
Experience: Serves on the SARB Board as a non-executive 
director; Board of Airports Company South Africa as a non-
executive director and member of the Audit Committee of the 
Government Communications and Information Systems. Held 
various senior executive positions including at Dr Temp (Pty) 
Limited, Oracle SA, Ansys Limited, Neotel, Jasco Limited, 
Spescom DataVoice (Pty) Limited, SAP SA, MTN, SITA (Pty) 
Limited, Denel Infoplan (a division within Denel (Pty) Limited)  and 
First National Bank. Has knowledge and skills in IT, banking, 
defence, rail, mining, mobile communications, telecommunications 
and data communications.
12
1213
K W (KHOLEKA) MZONDEKI I 56
Non-executive director
Government appointed: September 2023
Qualifications: Chartered Accountant (Fellow Chartered 
Certified Accountant, UK); BCom and Diploma in  
Investment Management
Experience: Serves on several JSE-listed company boards 
as an independent non-executive director (investment and 
transactions, remuneration, social and ethics). Is an 
internationally qualified chartered accountant and has 
extensive experience in senior finance executive roles as 
Financial Director and CFO. Currently chairs the Audit 
Committee of Thungela Resources. Served on the Telkom 
Board, as the lead independent non-executive director at 
Aveng, and was the Chairman of Trudon, a fintech solutions 
business. Has knowledge and skills in finance and 
accounting.
S (SHAMIMA) GAIBIE I 61
Non-executive director
Board appointed as a casual vacancy: August 2020
Shareholder elected: August 2021, re-elected in July 2024
Qualifications: BA and Bachelor of Laws (LLB) degrees, 
Wits; Master of Laws (LLM) degree from the London School 
of Economics and Political Science (University of London)
Experience: Admitted as an attorney, practising for more 
than 30 years in labour law, public sector law, commercial 
law and constitutional law, among other legislation. 
Previously served as a lecturer of law and acted as a judge 
in the Labour Court and High Court and is a senior director 
at law firm Cheadle Thompson & Haysom Inc. Has written 
articles on labour law and co-authored the 7th edition of 
Labour Relations Law: A Comprehensive Guide. Has 
knowledge and skills in various fields of law.
14
151615
11
 13
 14
12
 15
36 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
How the SARB is governed   |   Governance continued
Frequency and attendance of Board and its committee meetings from  
1 April 2024 to 31 March 2025
Names of Board members
Board 
(5 meetings)
Audit
Committee 
(5 meetings)
BREC
(4 meetings)
Nedcom
(4 meetings)
Remco 
(4 meetings)
Total meeting 
attendance for each 
member’s allocated 
committees
E L (Lesetja) Kganyago> 
Board Chairperson
5/5 5/5 4/4 n/a 4/4 18/18
N (Nomfundo) Tshazibana# 5/5 4/5* 4/4 n/a n/a 13/14
R (Rashad) Cassim† 5/5 5/5 n/a n/a 4/4 14/14
M M P (Mampho) Modise# 5/5 5/5 4/4 n/a n/a 14/14
C (Charlotte) Buitendag 5/5 n/a 3/4 4/4 n/a 12/13
N (Nicholas) Vink 5/5 n/a n/a 4/4 4/4 13/13
Y (Yvonne) Muthien  
Remco Chairperson
5/5 n/a n/a 4/4 4/4 13/13
Z (Zoaib) Hoosen
BREC Chairperson
5/5 5/5 4/4 4/4 n/a 18/18
L (Lerato) Molebatsi
Lead independent non-
executive director and 
Nedcom Chairperson
5/5 n/a 4/4 3/4* 3/4* 15/17
J M S D (Dudu) Msomi 5/5 n/a 4/4 4/4 4/4 17/17
M M T (Tryphosa) Ramano 3/5* 4/5* 4/4 3/4* n/a 14/18
N B (Norman) Mbazima
Audit Committee 
Chairperson 
5/5 4/5* 4/4 4/4 n/a 17/18
S (Shamima) Gaibie 4/5* n/a n/a 4/4 3/4* 11/13
K H (Kgabo) Badimo 5/5 5/5 4/4 4/4 n/a 18/18
K W (Kholeka) Mzondeki 4/5* 5/5 n/a 4/4 n/a 13/14
Numbers
 
71/75  
42/45  
39/40  
42/44  
26/28 220/232
Percentage  
94.6  
93.3  
97.5  
95.4  
92.8 94.83
> Attends Audit Committee, BREC and Remco meetings by invitation
#
 Attends Audit Committee and BREC meetings by invitation
†
 Attends Audit Committee and Remco meetings by invitation
*
 Apologised for absence(s)
n/a:
 not applicable
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   37 
Assessing effectiveness
The Board conducts an annual assessment of the SARB’s 
governance framework against best practice and regularly evaluates 
whether the King IV™ principles can be further applied. The Board 
Charter and the terms of reference of all Board committees are 
reviewed every three years, unless otherwise required. In line with 
the three-year cycle, the Board Charter and the terms of reference 
were reviewed in February 2023 and approved in March 2023. 
Board members perform annual self-assessments to evaluate how 
the Board and its committees are functioning. The Governor meets 
annually with Board members individually and the discussions are 
used to inform the nomination (or otherwise) of a Board member for 
re-election. Nomination recommendations are made after the Board 
has identified the skills and expertise needed to ensure its effective 
performance and after the contribution of non-executive directors to 
the work of the Board has been assessed.
Good performance
The role of governance is to support the SARB’s ability to achieve 
its strategy and fulfil its mandate. To be a credible and well-
governed institution, the SARB must have the structures, policies 
and the necessary skills to manage financial performance and 
ensure regulatory compliance and risk management, while 
conducting its social and ethical responsibilities. The Board 
committees are responsible for approving the SARB’s policies 
which they oversee and monitoring their implementation.
Board committees
The Board has the authority to establish committees and 
delegate specific powers to enhance its efficiency. While 
certain responsibilities may be assigned to committees, the 
Board reaffirms that the ultimate accountability for such 
matters remains with the Board, which must exercise its 
decision-making responsibility accordingly.
Non-executive directors chair all Board committees. Board 
and committee appointments and terms that expired 
during the year include:
S (Shamima) Gaibie was re-elected for a second term  
as a member of the Board on 31 July 2024 and 
reappointed to Remco.
N B (Norman) Mbazima was re-elected for a second term 
as a member of the Board on 31 July 2024 and 
reappointed as the Chairperson of the Audit Committee 
and a member of BREC.
Y (Yvonne) Muthien was re-elected for a third term as a 
member of the Board on 31 July 2024 and reappointed as 
the Chairperson of Remco.
The terms of office of L H (Lerato) Molebatsi and  
K H (Kgabo) Badimo, who serve as government-appointed 
non-executive directors, expired on 31 May 2025. The 
SARB is awaiting the appointments or reappointments of 
the two directors.
38 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
How the SARB is governed   |   Governance continued
Has an objective, independent 
role and assists the Board in 
fulfilling its oversight 
responsibilities relating to financial 
reporting, the system of internal 
controls, the audit process and, 
as appropriate, the SARB’s 
compliance with laws and 
regulations as these relate to 
financial reporting.
The Chairperson is a member of 
the audit committees of the 
currency-producing subsidiaries 
– the SA Mint and SABN – 
ensuring the sharing of 
information and alignment with 
the Group’s policies.
The Chairperson of BREC is a 
member.
AUDIT COMMITTEE
Membership
Chairperson
N B (Norman) Mbazima 
Non-executive directors
Z (Zoaib) Hoosen
M M T (Tryphosa) Ramano
K H (Kgabo) Badimo
K W (Kholeka) Mzondeki 
Attends by invitation
E L (Lesetja) Kganyago
R (Rashad) Cassim
N (Nomfundo) Tshazibana
M M P (Mampho) Modise
• Reviewed and noted the Gold and 
For
eign Exchange Contingency 
Reserve Account (GFECRA) 
settlement and payout accounting 
opinion.
•
 Reviewed and noted significant 
matters of judgement that impact on 
the SARB consolidated annual 
financial statements for the 2024/25 
financial year
-end (CPD Inter-
Governmental Cash Coordination, 
ABHL, Land Bank, other major 
accounting issues).
•
 Reviewed and noted the IFRS 
17 
(assessment of CODI).
•
 Reviewed all significant inter
nal and 
external audit findings and monitored 
management’s responses to these 
findings. The committee was satisfied 
with the audit quality and 
independence of the external 
auditors.
•
 Reviewed the utilisation of the SARB 
Gr
oup’s registered auditors and other 
auditing/accounting firms for 
non-audit/consulting services.
•
 Facilitated the pr
ocess of selecting 
new external auditors.
•
 Received a combined assurance 
r
eport in May 2024 together with the 
draft 2023/24 SARB Annual Report.
•
 The committee was satisfied with the 
assurance that the SARB’
s control 
environment is sound.
•  Noted the SARB Gr oup Litigation 
Report for the financial year 2024/25.
•
 Reviewed the Business Solutions 
and T
echnology Department’s 
(BSTD) quarterly reports.
•
 Noted the exter
nal auditor’s annual 
independence and audit quality 
declarations.
•
 Consider
ed the SARB Group annual 
financial statements and 
recommended them for approval to 
the Board.
•
 Reviewed the pr
oject management 
governance guidelines on the 
building project.
•
 Reviewed the r
eport on SARB 
insurance for 2024/25.
•
 Noted the EY transition plan for the 
SARB for the year ended 31 
March 
2026.
•
 Reviewed and appr
oved the annual 
fee limits for non-audit work by the 
statutory auditors for the SARB and 
the Group.
•
 Reviewed the scope of the inter
nal 
and external statutory audits.
•
 Assessed the SARB’
s internal audit 
and financial functions as well as the 
external auditors.
Key activities in 2024/25
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   39 
Assists the Board in discharging its 
responsibilities relating to risk 
management and good organisational 
citizenship behaviour, specifically social 
and ethics responsibilities. 
Oversees risk and ethics matters 
relating to the subsidiaries.
The Chairperson of the Audit 
Committee is a member.
Assists the Board in fulfilling its legal 
and oversight obligations and 
responsibilities, enhancing corporate 
governance practices, ensuring 
ongoing director training and 
development, and evaluating the 
performance of the Governor, DGs and 
Secretary of the SARB.
BOARD RISK AND ETHICS COMMITTEE (BREC)
NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ COMMITTEE (NEDCOM)
Membership
Chairperson
Z (Zoaib) Hoosen 
Non-executive directors
C B (Charlotte) Buitendag
L H (Lerato) Molebatsi
J M S D (Dudu) Msomi
M M T (Tryphosa) Ramano
K H (Kgabo) Badimo
N B (Norman) Mbazima 
Attends by invitation
E L (Lesetja) Kganyago
N (Nomfundo) Tshazibana
M M P (Mampho) Modise
Membership
Chairperson
L H (Lerato) Molebatsi 
Non-executive directors
C B (Charlotte) Buitendag
Z (Zoaib) Hoosen
Y (Yvonne) Muthien
N (Nicholas) Vink
S (Shamima) Gabie
J M S D (Dudu) Msomi
M M T (Tryphosa) Ramano
N B (Norman) Mbazima
K H (Kgabo) Badimo
K W (Kholeka) Mzondeki
Attends by invitation
E L (Lesetja) Kganyago
• Consider ed the status of risk management in the SARB Group, 
including strategic risk reports and projects risk profiles. 
•
 Consider
ed financial risk, security threats and cyber-risk reports, 
including current and emerging threats as well as insurance reports.
•
 Received r
eports on the internal audit work relating to risk 
management processes.
•
 Received SARB Gr
oup litigation reports.
•
 Reviewed r
eports on ethics management, which included the 
enhancement of ethics processes and procedures, and the 
amendments made to the Ethics Policy.
•
 Reviewed r
eports on business continuity management.
•
 Reviewed inter
nal audit work performed in respect of the risk 
management process in the SARB.
•
 Reviewed r
eports on the whistle-blowing hotline.
•
 Consider
ed the SARB’s annual corporate social investment  
(CSI) report.
•
 Consider
ed the SARB Group risk management and  
compliance reports.
•
 Consider
ed the status of compliance management across the 
SARB Group, including compliance universes, compliance risk 
assessments and the results of compliance monitoring activities.
•
 Received the status of implementation of the action plans to 
addr
ess recommendations from the SARB’s benchmark exercise, 
frameworks and reporting against best practices.
•
 Discussed topics on local and global 
economic envir
onments as well as areas of 
interest as part of ongoing director training 
and development.
•
 Consider
ed the performance of the Governor, 
DGs and Secretary of the SARB.
•
 Consider
ed the succession planning of 
directors.
•
 Consider
ed the training needs of directors and 
implemented an annual training schedule.
Key activities in 2024/25
Key activities in 2024/25
40 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
How the SARB is governed   |   Governance continued
Assists the Board in fulfilling its legal 
and oversight obligations and 
responsibilities relating to human 
resources and remuneration matters, 
and in enhancing corporate 
governance practices.
Recommends to the Board the 
remuneration packages of the 
Governor and DGs.
Reviews the broader human resources 
strategies to ensure that the SARB has 
an appropriate reward and 
performance management structure. 
Reviews the general remuneration 
policy of the SARB and monitors its 
implementation.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE (REMCO)
Membership
Chairperson
Y (Yvonne) Muthien
Non-executive directors
S (Shamima) Gaibie
L H (Lerato) Molebatsi
J M S D (Dudu) Msomi
N (Nicholas) Vink
Attends by invitation
E L (Lesetja) Kganyago
R (Rashad) Cassim
• Monitor ed the implementation of 
various initiatives, embedding a 
workforce plan that supports the 
SARB’s strategy, workforce 
demographics, talent and succession 
management, EVP and the ‘SARB 
Way of Work’ programme.
•
 Reviewed the Human Resour
ces 
Digitalisation Journey with the 
implementation of Phase 2 of the 
HCM Cloud Solution.
•
 Consider
ed reports on the Employee 
Wellness Programme (EWP) with 
mental health matters remaining a 
focal point for employees.
•
 Reviewed the SARB D&I jour
ney and 
its critical phases.
•
 Agr
eed on the annual salary 
increases for employees and the 
annual performance bonuses, for 
recommendation to the Board for 
approval.
•
 Noted the non-executive dir
ectors’ 
annual fees increase as approved by 
the GEC.
•
 Consider
ed reports on wage 
negotiations and settlement reached 
for salary increases for staff in the 
bargaining unit.
•
 Consider
ed reports on ethics and 
people-related risks as identified by 
the RMCD.
Key activities in 2024/25
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   41 
Executive management
Governors’ Executive Committee
In their capacity as executive directors and in line with the SARB Act, the Governor and DGs are responsible for the day-to-
day policy decisions and management of the SARB, except for those areas entrusted to the Board, Prudential Committee 
(PruCo) and CODI.
The members of the GEC are the Governor as Chairperson and the DGs. The Chief Operating Officer (COO), Group 
Executive: Currency Management and General Counsel attend the meetings ex officio. The Secretary and Assistant Secretary 
of the SARB also attend the GEC meetings and maintain a record of the deliberations and resolutions for dissemination to the 
Group, where applicable.
The GEC meets every two weeks and considers policy decisions, strategic matters and other executive management matters.
The following subcommittees of the GEC assist this committee in its responsibilities:
INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY STEERING COMMITTEE
Chairperson
DG R (Rashad) Cassim
Provides strategic oversight in the management of I&T, 
including:
•
 appr
oving, prioritising and monitoring strategic I&T 
projects and initiatives that foster technological 
innovation and advancement;
•
 overseeing I&T functions to ensur
e that projects and 
initiatives deliver value by meeting business objectives, 
providing effective support to departments; 
•
 driving the targeted organisational ar
chitecture, 
ensuring that departments are effectively supported by 
I&T functions;
•
 overseeing r
esource allocation and budget 
management;
•
 actively monitoring the performance of I&T systems, 
services and pr
ojects, ensuring that they meet 
predefined metrics and key performance indicators;
•
 overseeing risk management r
elated to I&T and that all 
IT projects comply with security, privacy and regulatory 
standards; and
•
 serving as a key link between I&T and other 
departments, ensuring alignment between technology 
and business needs.
PROCUREMENT COMMITTEE
Chairperson
COO P (Pradeep) Maharaj
• Oversees the governance of the procurement process 
to ensure that the acquisition of goods and services by 
the SARB or, where applicable, by its subsidiaries is in 
accordance with the SARB Group Procurement and 
Supplier Management Policy, related SARB Group risk 
policies and the current strategy of the SARB.
• Within its delegated authority, either approves the 
procurement of goods and services or recommends the 
procurement thereof to the GEC, giving consideration to 
all the commercial and legal elements that may 
influence the procurement decision, while noting that 
the evaluation and approval of the business case falls 
outside the function or its mandates.
• Reviews the overall broad-based black economic 
empowerment (B-BBEE) score attained annually to 
determine if it is in line with the approved B-BBEE 
strategy and whether the SARB is making progress 
against its targets.
How the SARB is governed   |   Governance continued
MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
Chairperson
DG M M P (Mampho) Modise
Monitors the day-to-day operational management, 
including:
•
 r
eviewing cross-cutting procedures and objectives for 
internal operations;
•
 r
eviewing and amending administrative and operational 
policies;
•
 pr
oviding assurance that policies and operational 
systems are aligned with best practice;
•
 considering management-r
elated issues for inclusion in 
the organisational strategy or operational matters;
•
 considering pr
ogress reports on the SARB strategy; 
and
•
 considering pr
ogress reports on the implementation of 
capital expenditure projects.
RISK MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE (RMC)
Chairperson
Governor E L (Lesetja) Kganyago
Oversees risk management in the SARB Group on 
behalf of the executive and reports on the risk 
management process, including:
•
 assuming r
esponsibility for risk management oversight, 
including business continuity, compliance, ethics and 
corporate citizenship by determining how these 
matters should be approached by the SARB Group, 
including the PA;
•
 r
eviewing and endorsing for approval by the BREC 
and GEC all the policies that are within the scope of 
the RMC’s responsibilities;
•
 evaluating and appr
oving key focus areas in the 
management of risk, compliance, ethics and good 
corporate citizenship matters of the SARB Group;
•
 r
eviewing the risk management, compliance 
management, ethics and good corporate citizenship 
reports; and
•
 ensuring that independent assurance is conducted on 
the ef
fectiveness of risk, compliance, ethics and 
corporate citizenship management to provide 
operational adequacy and effectiveness assurance to 
the GEC.
RESERVES MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
Chairperson
DG R (Rashad) Cassim
The SARB’s Gold and Foreign Exchange Reserves 
Management Investment Policy governs the management 
of reserves. Reserves are managed within the SARB’s 
overall risk tolerance framework and the related strategic 
benchmarks and targets are encapsulated in strategic 
asset allocation. External fund managers manage a 
portion of the FX reserves to enhance the internal 
reserves management capabilities and diversify risk and 
return. A three-tier governance structure clearly 
segregates the responsibilities for executive authority 
(GEC), strategic management (Reserves Management 
Committee) and portfolio management (FMD).
The Reserves Management Committee oversees the 
implementation of the Gold and Foreign Exchange 
Reserves Investment Policy and facilitates the prudent 
investment of South Africa’s official reserves, including:
•
 appointing and r
emoving external fund managers, 
financial custodians and securities lending agents;
•
 determining the allocation of the active risk budget;
•
 appr
oving investment guidelines and asset classes for 
tranches and portfolios;
•
 monitoring the overall performance of the r
eserves;
•
 overseeing quarterly risk r
eserves management;
•
 r
ecommending for approval by the GEC, changes to 
the Gold and Foreign Exchange Reserves Investment 
Policy, strategic asset allocation, the size of the 
Securities Lending Programme, the overall risk budget, 
tranche sizes and currency composition of tranches;
•
 monitoring the parameters for the annual and periodic 
r
e-balancing of tranche sizes and currency 
composition, the implementation of the investment 
policy, management of the investment portfolios and 
Securities Lending Programme as well as the 
implementation of the GEC resolutions; and
•
 r
eporting to the GEC quarterly and to the Board 
annually.
42 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   43 
Risk 
management
The SARB must execute its 
mandate of price and 
financial stability in a 
complex economic and 
financial environment where 
risks evolve rapidly. Owing 
to its critical role in the 
economy and the 
functioning of the financial 
system, the SARB places a 
strong emphasis on risk 
mitigation and 
management.
The SARB’s core functions, whether strategic, 
operational or policy-driven, come with 
inherent risks. To manage these risks, the 
SARB continuously monitors and responds to 
potential and actual political, economic and 
regulatory risks stemming from both the global 
and domestic environments. Additionally, risks 
associated with strategic initiatives and 
projects are managed through the SARB’s risk 
management framework, ensuring they remain 
within accepted levels of risk tolerance.
Given its unique role, the SARB’s risk 
management and control objectives go 
beyond institutional risk. It considers the public 
interest in line with its constitutional mandate 
and statutory responsibilities.
The risk management framework also 
incorporates the recommended risk 
management principles of King IV™. The 
SARB Group has adopted the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) 31000: 
Risk Management standard as its enterprise 
risk management framework.
Specialised cross-cutting risks
The coordinating role of the Risk Management and 
Compliance Department extends to the following 
cross-cutting risk categories.
Compliance
The RMCD provides centre-led compliance 
management within the SARB. A compliance 
management policy has been developed, ensuring the 
following obligations are met:
•
 Develop and maintain a Compliance Policy and 
framework.
•
 Identify, assess and monitor compliance with the 
applicable r
egulatory requirements.
•
 Monitor new r
egulatory developments.
•
 Enable compliance with envir
onmental, labour, Bill of 
Rights and AML legislations.
•
 Pr
omote a culture of compliance and ethics.
•
 Report on compliance risks to the RMC and BREC.
Business continuity
The SARB adheres to the Good Practice Guidelines of 
the Business Continuity Institute which are based on 
the ISO 22301: Business Continuity Management 
System (BCMS) standard. The SARB and its cash 
centres have received formal ISO 22301 BCM 
certification, continuing to maintain this international 
gold standard.
The RMCD centrally coordinates the SARB’s Business 
Continuity Management (BCM) programme, supported 
by a policy, framework, incident management plan, 
scenario analysis and an annual cycle of technical 
activities. The BCM Committee is fully operational.
The BCM function is involved with the Climate Change 
Programme and works closely with the Cyber and 
Information Security Unit (CISU), which oversees 
governance and the management of the Group’s Cyber 
and Information Security Programme.
44 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
How the SARB is governed   |   Risk management continued
Risk management framework
GROUP RISK MANAGEMENT POLICY
Heads of Department 
and Managing Directors
Oversee strategic, 
operational and project 
risk management.
Risk Management and 
Compliance Department
Facilitates and coordinates 
integrated risk 
management in the Group 
and provides reports to 
risk oversight committees. 
Risk Management 
Committee
Oversees the full 
spectrum of risk 
management in the 
Group on behalf of  
the GEC.
Board Risk and Ethics 
Committee
Reviews the status 
and effectiveness of risk 
management in the Group 
on behalf of the Board.
Risk governance Risk universe
RISK ASSESSMENTS
The risk management framework governs the 
full spectrum of risks, including strategic, policy 
process, operational (covering business 
continuity, cybersecurity, information security, 
compliance, occupational health and safety, 
climate change and CSI), reputational, project 
and financial risks.
CONTINUOUS RISK MANAGEMENT
This includes managing risk incidents, 
implementing action plans, conducting daily risk 
management activities, tracking key risk indicators, 
performing scenario analysis, and monitoring and 
assessing external risks including those arising 
from climate change.
Combined assurance
The SARB has adopted a combined assurance approach, 
in line with King IV™, to increase the effectiveness of 
assurance activities across the five lines of defence. The 
model has evolved and undergone continuous 
improvements, ensuring regular interaction, alignment of 
assessment methodologies and integrated dashboard-
based reporting throughout the lines of defence. The 
Combined Assurance Framework has been reviewed  
to align with the revised SARB Group Risk  
Management Policy.
The Group’s combined assurance approach to risk 
management and control aims to integrate, coordinate and 
align its assurance processes, optimising the levels of risk, 
governance and control oversight.
Combined Assurance Forum
The forum ensures the ongoing review of the 
combined assurance approach, model and 
processes as well as the sharing of information 
and coordination of efforts among the assurance 
providers. This approach contributes significantly 
towards an effective control environment and 
upholds the integrity of information used by 
management, the Board and its committees for 
internal decision-making. Based on reports from 
the lines of defence, the Combined Assurance 
Forum considers the adopted combined 
assurance approach to be adequate, effective and 
aligned with best practices.
Combined assurance providers aligned with the Combined Assurance Model
Departmental management 
Integrated risk management
Internal Audit
Independent external 
assurance service providers:
external audit and other 
independent assurance
Board
Third line 
of defence
Fifth line 
of defence
First line 
of defence
Second line 
of defence
Fourth line 
of defence
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                  45 
The managers of each department are responsible for the ongoing 
identification, assessment and management of their department’s risks. 
This includes the design, implementation and maintenance of an 
adequate and effective system of control.
The RMCD performs a centre-led and integrated role in risk 
management coordination, ensuring that risks are managed according to 
internationally accepted standards and guidelines. The CISU proactively 
safeguards the SARB Group’s digital infrastructure, enhancing business 
resilience and mitigating potential consequences from cyberthreats. The 
Privacy Centre of Excellence is responsible for the lawful processing of 
personal information for the SARB Group.
The IAD operates as an independent, objective assurance and advisory 
service. Its role is to evaluate whether risk management, control and 
overall governance processes are adequately designed and function 
effectively.
The IAD is systematic and disciplined in assessing these processes and 
advises management on developing control solutions. It also monitors the 
implementation of corrective actions taken by managers.
The IAD’s work spans across the SARB Group, covering all operational 
functions and IT systems and processes. This work aligns with the Institute 
of Internal Auditors International Professional Practices Framework.
Independent external auditors review the Group’s annual financial 
statements. When deemed necessary, other external assurance service 
providers are used to obtain independent assurance on the adequacy 
and effectiveness of the internal processes and practices, ensuring they 
are aligned to international best practices.
The Board oversees that the Combined Assurance Model is implemented 
to cover significant risks and material matters through a combination of the 
various assurance services and functions for the SARB Group.
Looking ahead
• Risk management will be continually 
enhanced to become mor
e forward-looking 
and to better support business objectives, 
with a continued focus on the key risks that 
could prevent the SARB from achieving its 
Strategy 2030 objectives.
•
 Risk Management Cultur
e and Ethics 
management will be improved, along with 
the enhancement of collaboration and 
engagement with both internal and external 
stakeholders.
•
 The integration of Enterprise-W
ide Risk 
Management will be improved.
•
 Data, information and technology solutions 
will be optimised, integrated and leveraged 
mor
e effectively.
2024/25 Performance highlights
• The RMCD continued to implement action plans to addr ess the 
recommendations from the SARB’s benchmark exercise, 
frameworks and reporting against best practices.
•
 The SARB successfully implemented the r
evised risk 
management policy and methodology.
•
 Collaboration between risk management, strategy formulation 
 
and other assurance service providers was enhanced.
•
 A risk management I&T platform that will support integration 
 
was procured.
•
 Risk management training and awar
eness initiatives were 
completed with all targeted stakeholders.
•
 The SARB r
eceived ongoing ISO 22301 BCM certification from 
the British Standard Institute, confirming compliance with effective 
business continuity system requirements.
•
 The new Employee Compliance and Conduct declarations system 
was successfully launched.
•
 Successfully played a lead r
ole in BCMS peer reviews of various 
central banks as part of the SADC CCBG ICT and Business 
Resilience subcommittee.
Policy implementation   |   Prudential regulation continued
Overview of the world economy
Global inflation continued to moderate in 
2024, easing to 5.7% from 6.6% in 2023 
and 8.6% in 2022. Favourable price 
developments in food and energy, 
coupled with restrictive monetary policy, 
have underpinned this moderation. While 
the easing trend is expected to continue, 
it will not be without setbacks. 
Monetary policy 
under high 
uncertainty
THE SARB’S 
PERFORMANCE
46 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   47 
Global headline inflation is projected to average 4.3% in 2025 and 3.6% in 2026. 1 However, the disinflation process has 
slowed in recent months and monthly inflation outcomes have become more volatile and less consistently downward. 2  
Inflation continues to exceed the 2% target set by most 
advanced economies, largely due to sticky services inflation 
amid somewhat elevated household demand and wage 
pressures. Goods disinflation has also slowed. Additionally, 
new inflationary risks have emerged globally, including rising 
tariffs and escalating trade tensions, which pose serious 
risks of geoeconomic fragmentation and supply chain 
breakdowns. However, assessing the impact of these 
factors on inflation and growth is complicated by weekly 
policy reversals and high uncertainty about policy endpoints. 
Such shocks to world trade are also likely to have negative 
effects on global economic growth. At this stage, it is 
unclear whether the inflationary effects of tariffs and 
fragmentation will offset the disinflationary effects of 
cooling labour markets and weakening global demand and 
growth. As a result, market sentiment has shifted, with 
inflation expectations rising and growth outlooks 
deteriorating, raising serious concerns about stagflation 
and ineffective policy responses. 
2025
Forecast
Source: IMF
2020201520102005
  Headline CPI      
 2010–19 average (pre-COVID)
 October 2024 forecast
Global inﬂation
Percentage change
0
2
4
6
8
10
Source: S R Baker, N Bloom and S J Davis. 'Measuring economic policy uncertainty'. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4). 2016. pp1593–1636
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025
 Trade policy uncertainty
 Economic policy uncertainty
Economic and trade policy uncertainty
Index
0
200
400
600
800
1 000
1 200
1  IMF . World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update. Washington DC: IMF. April 2025.
2 
 IMF
. WEO. Washington DC: IMF. October 2024.
48 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Monetary policy under high uncertainty continued
Surrounded by stubborn inflation and the emergence of new 
risks, central banks worldwide have adopted a more 
cautious approach, implementing smaller-than-expected rate 
cuts. In emerging markets, inflation volatility has also kept 
rate cuts modest, while countries like Japan, Brazil and 
Russia have had to raise rates due to signs of inflation 
expectations becoming de-anchored. 
The stubbornness of inflation suggests that demand has 
been somewhat resilient, partly reflecting expansionary fiscal 
policies and relatively strong wage growth buoyed by robust 
labour markets. This resilience may also reflect less traction 
from monetary policy – if neutral interest rates have risen, then 
policy is less disinflationary than central banks assume. As a 
result, interest rates are likely to remain above their pre-
pandemic levels for longer, as central banks look to anchor 
inflation back to targets. Nonetheless, and despite the less 
sanguine view of inflation risks, modest policy adjustments by 
major central banks are still expected this year. 
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Contributions to trading-partner growth*
Per cent
 Rest of the countries (26.3%)
 Japan (5.8%)
 South Africa’s trading partners Sep 2024
 South Africa’s trading partners May 2025
 Sub-Saharan Africa (22.5%)
 Eurozone (22.5%)
 China (13.7%)
 US (9.4%)
* Weights in brackets (Percentages may not add up to 100 due to rounding.)
Source: SARB
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Contributions to trading-partner growth*
Per cent
 Rest of the countries (26.3%)
 Japan (5.8%)
 South Africa’s trading partners Sep 2024
 South Africa’s trading partners May 2025
 Sub-Saharan Africa (22.5%)
 Eurozone (22.5%)
 China (13.7%)
 US (9.4%)
* Weights in brackets (Percentages may not add up to 100 due to rounding.)
Source: SARB
Turning to economic activity, global growth averaged 
3.3% in 2024, though individual country performances 
varied greatly. This past year, the US again stood out 
among advanced economies, achieving a 2.8% 
growth rate, largely driven by strong consumer 
spending. In contrast, the eurozone faced challenges 
as weak fixed investment and a lacklustre 
manufacturing performance weighed on economic 
output. Emerging markets gave a mixed performance, 
with India maintaining impressive growth while China 
struggled with weak demand, placing a drag on its 
economic activity.
The outlook for the near to medium term, however, 
has shifted markedly, with trading-partner growth now 
seen much weaker due to the impacts of tariffs and 
trade tensions on supply chains and demand as well 
as the effects of uncertainty on economic activity more 
generally. Slower trading-partner growth also reflects 
more muted growth in some of South Africa’s key 
trading partners in sub-Saharan Africa, which have 
been affected by subdued performance in commodity 
exports. The SARB forecasts trading-partner growth of 
only 2.5% this year, broadly unchanged from the 
previous year, and to rise slightly to 2.9% next year.
3 
Nevertheless, downside risks to global growth have 
increased, aggravated by the ongoing trade tensions 
and tariff increases. 
3  IMF . WEO Update. April 2025. (The IMF projects global growth to decline to 2.8% this year, from 3.3% in the previous year, and to rise to 3% in 2026.)
The chart shows South Africa’s major trading partners and their weighted contributions to South Africa’s trading-partner growth.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   49 
Economic activity in South Africa remained subdued, with 
growth slowing to 0.5% in 2024 compared with 0.7% in 
2023. Despite improvements in electricity supply and 
stabilisation in logistics, the domestic economy continues 
to face challenges such as high costs of production, 
including energy and operating expenses, alongside a 
decline in competitiveness. Growth in economic activity 
was particularly weak when compared to other emerging 
market peers.
On the supply side, the tertiary sector, notably the finance 
subsector which expanded by 4% in the second half of 
2024, once again led economic growth. However, the 
primary and secondary sectors struggled, largely due to a 
poor agricultural performance and the hysteresis effects 
from load-shedding and logistical constraints affecting 
mining, manufacturing and construction, among other 
sectors. Overall, economic activity remains lacklustre, with 
six of the 10 economic sectors contributing negatively to 
growth during this period.
Support from demand and spending was also limited as 
the lingering effects of supply bottlenecks and muted 
output growth impacted investments, which contracted by 
3.7% over the past year. On the other hand, consumer 
spending grew, lifting growth in gross domestic 
expenditure. A favourable combination of low inflation, 
interest rate cuts and withdrawals from the two-pot 
pension system helped improve real incomes, credit 
demand and affordability. Additionally, government 
consumption also contributed to growth this past year.
Looking ahead, growth is expected to continue to be 
supported by household consumption spending, despite 
the pull from fiscal drag and muted employment growth. 
Investment is projected to rebound to 1.8% this year and 
to rise to 3.4% by 2027. The rest of the components of 
gross domestic product (GDP) are forecast to have a 
broadly neutral impact on growth. 
Domestic real economy developments
Emerging
markets
Brazil Russia China India South Africa
GDP: South Africa versus emerging markets 
Percentage change
 2023
 2024
 Long-term average (2010–19)
Sources: IMF and Stats SA
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
50 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Household 
consumption
Government 
consumption
Total investment
Inventories
Percentage points
Contributions to real GDP growth
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Sources: Stats SA and SARB
Forecast
* Percentage change
Net exports
Residual
GDP*
202620242022202020182016
2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026
Core versus non-core inﬂation*
Per cent
 Headline
 Core
 Non-core
Forecast
Midpoint
Sources: Stats SA and SARB
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
South Africa’s headline inflation decelerated sharply during the 
second half of 2024, reaching 2.8% in October and stabilising 
around 3% thereafter. The decline was broad-based, affecting 
both core and non-core inflation rates.
5 Factors contributing to 
this disinflation included lower food and fuel price inflation as 
well as rand appreciation. On average, headline inflation for 
2024 was 4.4%, marking a decline from 6% recorded in 2023.
Core inflation declined by 0.5 percentage points, averaging 
4.3% in 2024 compared with 4.8% in 2023. The decline was 
driven by a strong rand, which reduced the cost of imported 
goods, along with monetary policy settings that better 
managed demand and mitigated second-round effects from 
the earlier rises in food and fuel inflation.
Headline inflation is projected to average 3.2% this year, 
increasing to 4.2% in 2026 before reverting to the target 
midpoint by 2027. This muted trajectory reflects lower inflation 
projections across all key components of headline inflation, 
supported by a favourable starting point, lower assumptions 
for fuel and electricity price increases and a relatively strong 
rand exchange rate. The trajectory of core inflation is forecast 
to closely track headline inflation. Inflation risks appear 
balanced overall, with trade policy uncertainties and potential 
rand depreciation posing as the main upside risks. 
Inflation dynamics
The SARB’s performance   |   Monetary policy under high uncertainty continued
The economy is expected to grow by 1.2% in 2025, 
advancing to 1.8% by 2027. Potential growth is also seen 
weaker at 1.1% this year, gradually rising to 1.7% by 
2027, as the effects of Operation Vulindlela reforms take 
time to reflect in economic activity, particularly investment. 
Nonetheless, uncertainties surrounding global trade 
tensions and tariff increases remain significant risks to 
domestic growth prospects.
4
4 This works thr ough both the direct effect on SA exports to the US and indirectly via weaker global growth.
5 
 Cor
e inflation excludes volatile items such as food, non-alcoholic beverages, fuel and electricity, while non-core inflation includes these items.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   51 
 
 Real repo rate 
 Neutral real repo rate
Forecast
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Per cent
Real repo and neutral real repo rates
Source: SARB
20272025202320212019
The MPC has reduced the policy rate by a cumulative  
100 basis points since September 2024, bringing it down to 
7.25%. These rate reductions have brought the policy rate 
closer to its estimated neutral level, despite the current 
environment of elevated risks and a higher long-term 
inflation-neutral rate.
While inflation and its medium-term outlook are assessed to 
be moderate, there are growing risks due to domestic 
uncertainties and global trade tensions, reducing confidence 
in the stability of inflation over the medium term. The SARB 
remains committed to maintaining low and stable inflation to 
support balanced and sustainable economic growth.
Recently, discussions have emerged regarding whether 
South Africa’s current inflation target midpoint of 4.5% is 
consistent with price stability and whether adjusting it to a 
lower rate might help secure the current trend of low 
inflation. Analyses undertaken by the SARB, NT and other 
experts highlight significant potential benefits from reducing 
the inflation target to 3%. Modelling by the SARB for the 
May MPC meeting supports this, indicating that inflation 
expectations could decline quickly given the recent history of 
inflation hovering around the lower end of the target band, 
along with enhanced SARB credibility.  
Monetary policy decisions
 Consequently, borrowing costs would fall more significantly 
under the 3% scenario compared to the baseline forecast over 
the projected period.
The joint SARB-NT team is almost done with its work on the 
inflation target and will soon present its recommendations to 
the Governor and the Minister of Finance. Governance structure
MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE 
(meets every two months)
Chairperson
Governor of the SARB
Members
6
DG R (Rashad) Cassim
DG N (Nomfundo) Tshazibana
DG M (Mampho) Modise 
Head of ERD 
C (Christopher) Loewald 
Adviser to the Governors 
D (David) Fowkes
Responsibilities
The MPC drives the SARB’s responsibilities to achieve 
and maintain price stability by:
•
 r
eviewing economic data, including forecasts, and 
deciding the appropriate interest rate needed to 
deliver the SARB’s mandate and meet the inflation 
target; and 
•
 engaging with stakeholders and the public on its 
monetary policy decisions in the pr
ess conference 
that follows each meeting and various Monetary 
Policy Forums (MPFs).
 6  Other than the DGs, the members of the MPC ar e appointed by the 
Governor after consultation with the DGs.
52 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Responding to  
climate change 
risks
For four billion people across 111 
countries, 2024 marked the hottest 
year on record.
7 The rising 
temperatures have disrupted the 
global water cycle, leading to more 
frequent extreme weather events 
such as severe droughts, floods 
and wildfires. 
To integrate climate-related risks into its assessment of 
financial stability, the SARB completed its first-ever climate risk 
stress test for systemically important banks. Starting in March 
2024, this exercise assessed the potential effects of climate 
change risks over a period extending to 2050, using three 
scenarios. The scenarios were aligned with those developed 
by the NGFS.
Central banks play a crucial role in conducting analyses to 
address knowledge gaps and help with policy development. 
During the review period, the SARB initiated an extensive 
research programme focusing on the impacts of climate change 
on Southern African countries, particularly on price and financial 
stability. The findings will be published in 2025 and shared with 
central banks throughout the region.
In line with other central banks, the SARB is striving to minimise 
its carbon footprint. The SARB’s carbon neutral strategy entails 
reducing electricity usage and investing in renewable energy 
sources. Current efforts are progressing as planned.
The SARB is an active contributor to the work of the G20 
Sustainable Finance Working Group under South Africa’s 2025 
G20 Presidency. The focus is on resolving issues in the global 
sustainable finance architecture, increasing funding for 
adaptation and developing carbon markets. These global 
platforms facilitate the sharing of experiences and the creation 
of urgent, coordinated global policy responses to the growing 
risks associated with climate change.
The SARB’s collaboration with international organisations to 
develop appropriate responses to climate change risks affecting 
the South African economy continues. These organisations 
include the NGFS, the International Association of Insurance 
Supervisors (IAIS) and Sustainable Insurance Forum, the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and the Sustainable 
Banking and Finance Network.
These events have caused enormous social and economic 
damage across developed and developing nations. Countries 
with better disaster risk management frameworks and stable 
financial systems are better positioned to manage the impacts 
of these extreme events on businesses and households.
In line with global best practices, the SARB continues to 
identify and respond to climate change-related risks to 
ensure both price and financial stability.
Over the past year, the PA published four guidance notes on 
climate-related disclosures, risk management and governance 
practices for banks and insurers. These notes aim to enhance 
financial institutions’ responses to climate-related risks, thereby 
contributing to the resilience of the financial system. Monitoring 
and evaluating the implementation of these guiding principles 
will be an important next step in ensuring that financial 
institutions can effectively manage and mitigate climate-related 
risks.
Following the development of the supervisory guideline on 
climate-related risks, the PA is refining its supervisory  
approach by creating climate-related risk indicators to address 
some of the data gaps in current supervisory reporting 
frameworks. Additionally, the PA is finalising supervisory case 
studies on credit risk as an initial step to improve its risk 
assessment process.
7   Australian National University. Climate extr emes in 2024 ‘wreaking havoc’ on the global water cycle. 6 January 2025. https://www.
anu.edu.au/news/all-news/climate-extremes-in-2024-wreaking-havoc-on-the-global-water-cycle
The SARB’s performance   |   Responding to climate change risks
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   53 
The SARB monitors and assesses risks and vulnerabilities in 
the financial system, using both quantitative measures and 
expert judgement. These risks are discussed at FSC 
meetings and communicated through the biannual 
publication of the FSR.
8
If an event occurs that could threaten the stability of the 
broader financial system (i.e. a systemic event) or is 
imminent, the SARB may take any necessary steps to 
mitigate and manage the event to protect financial stability 
and the wider economy.
Main risks and vulnerabilities identified 
in 2024/25
Systemic risks that weighed on the financial stability outlook 
during the financial year included escalating global conflicts 
and geopolitical risks. Country-specific factors, such as the 
implications of being on the FATF greylist, continued to 
weigh on domestic institutions, despite notable progress 
made by South Africa in remediating the deficiencies 
identified by the FATF.
The SARB is tasked, through the 
FSR Act, with safeguarding South 
Africa’s financial system and 
maintaining its stability. The SARB 
ensures that the financial system 
remains resilient to domestic and 
global shocks and risks that may 
threaten it, ensuring it can keep 
funds flowing efficiently through the 
economy, even during times of 
stress. Like price stability, financial 
stability is essential for sustainable 
economic growth.
Maintaining 
financial stability
8  SARB. Financial Stability Review (FSR). February 2025. https://www.
resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/review/financial-stability-review

54 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
During the period under review, the SARB introduced a 
visual representation of the key risks to the domestic 
financial system and the vulnerability of these risks. To this 
end, the RVM shows the residual vulnerability of the financial 
system to key financial stability risks. Residual vulnerability 
considers both the probability of a risk materialising within 
the forecast period (i.e. the next 12 months) and the effect 
of mitigating (or amplifying) factors that reduce (or increase) 
the financial system’s vulnerability to these risks.
The RVM provides a forward-looking assessment of the key 
risks to financial stability in South Africa. The key risks are 
identified based on the current situation but also consider 
possible future developments and the vulnerability of the 
financial system to these developments.
November 2024 June 2025
Less vulnerable More vulnerable
Source: SARB
The SARB’s Residual Vulnerability Matrix 
Perpetual risks
Climate change
A cyber-incident with
systemic impact
Low and inequitable
economic growth
Critical
domestic
infrastructure
failure
Increased geopolitical
tension and policy uncertainty
Increased ﬁnancial
distress in households
and SMEs
Deteriorating
public sector
debt ratios
Remaining on the
FATF greylist over
the medium term
Rapid capital
outﬂows amid
heightened market
uncertainty
Financial stability heatmap
The SARB uses a wide range of indicators that are designed 
to identify the early build-up of financial imbalances that 
could contribute to financial instability if left unattended. A 
snapshot of all material developments is reflected in the 
financial stability heatmap, which is data-driven and based 
on historical information.
Update from the Financial Stability 
Committee
At its October 2023 meeting, the FSC resolved that a 
positive cycle-neutral (PCN) countercyclical capital buffer 
(CCyB) of 1% be implemented in South Africa. A PCN CCyB 
increases financial sector resilience by allowing the capital 
requirements of banks to be reduced during times of stress. 
The phase-in period for the 1% buffer started on  
1 January 2025 and it is expected to be fully implemented 
by 31 December 2025. The FSC continues to monitor 
market risks that might result from large holdings of 
government bonds by banks. In this regard the FSC resolved 
that the PA would continue to monitor and close valuation 
gaps in banks’ holdings of SA government bonds.
The SARB’s performance   |   Maintaining financial stability continued
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   55 
Net portfolio purchases by non-resident investors
Real effective exchange rate
US ﬁnancial conditions
Government: primary budget balance
Government: interest-to-revenue ratio
Government: debt-to-GDP ratio
Non-ﬁnancial corporates: interest coverage ratio
Non-ﬁnancial corporates: debt-to-net-operating income ratio
Households: net savings
Households: debt-service ratio
Households: debt-to-disposable income ratio
SRISK
Other ﬁnancial intermediaries: leverage
Other ﬁnancial intermediaries: liquidity transformation
Other ﬁnancial intermediaries: credit intermediation
Non-life insurance: solvency capital requirement
Non-life insurance: leverage
Non-life insurance: liquidity transformation
Life insurance: solvency capital requirement
Life insurance: leverage
Life insurance: liquidity transformation
Banks: housing market exposure
Banks: sovereign exposure
Banks: maturity mismatches
Banks: liquidity coverage ratio
Banks: loan-to-deposit ratio
Banks: real credit growth
Banks: capital adequacy ratio
Banks: lending margin
Emerging markets: corporate spreads
Merrill Lynch Option Volatility Estimate
South African credit default swap spread
Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index
JSE: price-earnings ratio
Real house price growth
Low
High
Methodology:The heatmap is based on a z-score transformation of the underlying indicators. The transformed indicators are thereafter 
mapped onto an empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF). Low values from the ECDF are mapped to green while higher values 
are mapped to shades of red. 
* Other ﬁnancial intermediaries include unit trusts and ﬁnance companies.
2022 2023 2024
The financial stability heatmap
56 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Maintaining financial stability continued
Stress testing
Stress testing assesses whether financial 
institutions have adequate levels of capital and 
liquidity to deal with extreme but plausible 
negative shocks. The SARB periodically 
conducts macroprudential stress tests on South 
African financial institutions that may pose 
systemic risks.
Stress testing is a forward-looking 
macroprudential tool that offers unique insight 
into the strengths and vulnerabilities of the 
financial system. It is one of several instruments 
that the SARB employs to monitor and assess 
financial stability. Stress testing contributes to 
the protection and enhancement of financial 
stability, as outlined in the SARB’s mandate set 
out in the FSR Act.
The SARB conducted its first CRST in March 
2024. The CRST subjected systemically 
important South African banks to a set of 
plausible, long-term climate-related scenarios 
and their impact on banks’ credit risk.
The outcomes of the exercise indicated that 
while SIFIs are reasonably well-positioned to 
assess their vulnerability to climate risks, 
challenges relating to data gaps and modelling 
capabilities were identified as areas for potential 
improvement in subsequent stress-testing 
exercises.
The Resolution Authority
The Resolution Authority (RA), became 
operational on 1 June 2023. As the RA, the 
SARB manages the resolution procedures of all 
banks and non-bank SIFIs and continues to 
develop resolution plans for designated 
financial institutions. The RA does this in the 
public interest, ensuring an orderly resolution 
process, protecting depositors’ money and 
minimising the burden on taxpayers. Resolution 
plans aim to improve how a designated 
financial institution will deal with a crisis. This 
will ensure that resolution processes are orderly 
and ultimately protect financial stability. The 
SARB regularly conducts crisis simulation 
exercises to test an institution’s ability to deal 
with a crisis. Two crisis simulation exercises 
were conducted in March 2025, which tested 
the Resolution Authority and CODI’s decision-
making processes in the unlikely event of a 
bank being placed in resolution and it is no 
longer able to meet its financial obligations. 
Crisis simulation exercises provide invaluable 
insights into how real-time coordination in a 
crisis scenario could be improved in the interest 
of protecting and enhancing financial stability.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                  57 
Governance structures
FINANCIAL STABILITY COMMITTEE 
(four meetings during the reporting year)
Chairperson
Governor of the SARB
Committee members
DGs, other MPC members and the heads of line departments 9
Meetings are divided into two sessions:
•
 an information session on developments in the global and domestic 
envir
onments that may impact domestic financial stability; and
•
 a policy session in which mitigating actions ar
e considered that address any 
adverse impact on domestic financial stability.
FINANCIAL STABILITY OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE (FSOC)10 
(two meetings during the reporting year)
Chairperson
Governor of the SARB
Committee members
SARB, NT and representatives of financial sector regulators 11
The FSOC:
•
 facilitates cooperation between financial sector regulators and the SARB on 
financial stability matters;
•
 makes r
ecommendations to the Governor on the designation of SIFIs; and
•
 makes r
ecommendations to other organs of state to assist in promoting, 
protecting, maintaining, managing or preventing risks to financial stability.
FINANCIAL SECTOR CONTINGENCY FORUM (FSCF)12 
(two meetings during the reporting year)
Chairperson
DG responsible for Financial Stability
Forum members
SARB and representatives of financial sector regulators, financial sector 
industry associations and organs of state
The FSCF assists the FSOC and SARB with:
•
 identifying potential risks that may r
esult in a systemic event occurring; and
•
 coor
dinating appropriate plans, mechanisms and structures to mitigate risks.
The FSCF has two subcommittees:
•
 the Operational Risk Subcommittee, which develops contingency measur
es 
for events that could severely disrupt operational continuity in the financial 
sector; and
•
 the Financial Sector Cyber Resilience Subcommittee, which focuses on 
industry-wide ef
forts to increase the resilience of the financial sector to 
cyberattacks.
9  The r elevant line departments include 
FinStab, the PA departments, Financial 
Surveillance and the NPSD. 
10 
 An inter
nal non-statutory committee
11
  Financial Sector Conduct Authority 
(FSCA), Financial Intelligence Centr
e (FIC), 
National Credit Regulator (NCR) and PA.
12
  Statutory committees pr
escribed by the 
FSR Act.
58 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Protecting depositors
Protecting 
depositors 
A year into operations, CODI is a key 
component of South Africa’s financial 
safety net, providing depositors 
reasonable access to their money should 
their bank fail or be placed in resolution.
In accordance with the FSR Act, CODI administers and manages the Deposit 
Insurance Fund (DIF) and works to raise public awareness of CODI’s benefits 
and limitations of its protection.
CODI’s funding model
The DIF 
As at April 2024, and per the FSR Act, CODI established the DIF using 
financial contributions from banks in the form of a loan (liquidity 
contribution)
13 and premiums.14
CODI will use the DIF to provide qualifying bank depositors up to R100 000 of 
their qualifying account balances if their bank fails and goes into resolution. As 
at 31 March 2025, the DIF balance was R20 billion.
CODI annually assesses the size of the DIF to ensure it can fulfil its role in a 
bank resolution.
Operational expenses
CODI started collecting levies15 from banks on 1 April 2024 to cover its 
operational expenses. In adherence to the FSR Act, CODI minimises its 
expenses by outsourcing its support functions to various SARB 
departments, which includes using their assets, resources and other 
services. In addition, CODI leverages technology to automate internal 
processes, ensuring that its organisational structure remains small  
and efficient.
Public awareness of depositor protection
Raising awareness of depositor protection is a critical element of CODI’s 
legislated functions. CODI launched a campaign to inform the public 
about its operationalisation, the protection it offers and the limits of this 
protection.
CODI spokespeople participated in over 65 media interviews across television, 
radio, print and online platforms.
The deposit insurance legislative framework requires banks to inform and 
educate their customers about depositor protection. CODI provided banks 
with training on these requirements and standardised materials for 
communicating their CODI membership and the benefits and limitations of 
CODI’s protection.
Membership to CODI
Membership to CODI is mandatory for all banks registered under the 
Banks Act, Mutual Banks Act 124 of 1993 and the Co-operative Banks 
Act 40 of 2007 (CBA). It also includes banks operating within the borders 
of South Africa that are regulated and supervised by the PA.
13  The liquidity contributions fr om banks are calculated as 3% of the bank’s covered deposits.
14
  Pr
emiums are calculated at 0.2% of a bank’s covered deposits per year, payable over 12 months.
15
 Levies ar
e based on 0.015% of a bank’s covered deposits.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   59 
CODI maintains a list of these banks on its webpage and 
banks are required to display the CODI membership sign on 
their digital platforms or in physical branches for the benefit 
of depositors.
CODI’s communication with the  
banking industry
CODI regularly informs member banks on the legislative 
requirements for deposit insurance, monitors their 
compliance with the deposit insurance legislative 
framework and keeps them updated on any 
developments in deposit insurance.
Additionally, CODI meets quarterly with the Banking 
Association South Africa’s Deposit Insurance Task Group 
to provide updates on various matters, including 
legislative and regulatory developments, system 
advancements and public awareness initiatives.
Strategic success
During the past year, CODI achieved several strategic 
objectives: 
•
 Established the DIF and r
eached the targeted fund 
size approved by the CODI Board.
•
 Launched a public awar
eness campaign to educate 
the public about depositor protection.
•
 Pr
ovided banks with communication materials and 
guidelines to help them meet their legal obligations 
to inform the public about CODI and depositor 
protection.
•
 Successfully completed a r
esolution simulation 
facilitated by the World Bank which tested the 
coordination and decision-making between financial 
safety net participants when a bank is placed in 
resolution.
•
 Developed pr
ocesses and templates to improve 
CODI’s speed and efficiency in providing support 
when a bank is placed in resolution.
•
 Completed the development of a foundational 
 
IT solution.
13  The liquidity contributions from banks are calculated as 3% of the bank’s covered deposits.
14  Premiums are calculated at 0.2% of a bank’s covered deposits per year, payable over 12 months.
15 Levies are based on 0.015% of a bank’s covered deposits.
Key approvals of the CODI Board during this financial year
4 June 2024 6 September 2024 26 November 2024 3 March 2025
• CODI’ s annual report 
and financial 
statements for the 
2024/25 financial year
•
 Investment policy
• Reduction of the target 
size of the DIF from 4% 
to 3% of covered 
deposits
• Appointment of 
designated banks 
for the CODI panel 
of payout agent 
banks
•
  CODI’ s strategy from  
2025 to 2030
•
 CODI’s plan to become 
self-funded
• Operational budget for 
the 2025/26 financial year
• Maintaining the liquidity 
tier size at 3% of covered 
deposits for the 2025/26 
financial year
• Size of the liquid and 
investment tranches and 
cash holdings of the DIF 
investment portfolio
• 2025 Board workplan
• Ratification of the 
appointment of 
BDO as exter
nal  
auditors for the 
2024/25 financial 
year-end audit
Approvals
Looking ahead
CODI plans to hire external fund managers to invest the 
DIF money to boost income, proposing to gradually 
change the DIF’s composition by reducing banks’ loans 
and increasing bank premiums. This is to reduce CODI’s 
dependency on loan funding from the banks.
CODI will develop internal processes, templates and 
contractual agreements for supporting a bank resolution.
CODI will focus on Phase 2 of its IT system rollout to 
process depositor information from banks and will create 
mechanisms to validate these submissions.
Mutual banks, co-operative banks, commercial banks 
and branches of foreign banks are currently CODI 
members. CODI will explore the feasibility of expanding 
membership to co-operative financial institutions (CFIs).
Since CODI is a newly operationalised entity, many of its 
organisational processes are new and will be refined and 
matured over time. CODI will continue to conduct public 
awareness initiatives to build confidence in its protection.
CODI aims to assess compliance with the revised Core 
Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance and develop a 
plan to address any non-compliance.
The CODI Board and Investment 
Committee
The FSR Act establishes two key governance structures for 
CODI: the CODI Board and the CODI Investment 
Committee. The CODI Board is tasked with approving 
CODI’s strategy and decisions related to the DIF, while the 
Investment Committee reviews the DIF’s investment portfolio 
and makes recommendations to the Board on how to invest 
the funds in the DIF.
60 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Prudential regulation
Prudential 
regulation
Seven years into its 
establishment, the PA 
continues to maintain the 
resilience and stability of 
South Africa’s financial 
system through sound 
regulation and effective 
supervision. The supervision 
of financial institutions takes 
place in the context of 
prevailing economic and 
financial conditions.
The PA pays attention to the external 
environment and how individual financial 
institutions respond to it. Of particular 
importance is that individual institutions have 
robust and dynamic strategic plans, risk 
mitigation and other governance measures that 
ensure that depositors’ and policy holder funds 
remain safe in changing economic conditions. 
During the reporting period, there has been 
elevated policy uncertainty, which has 
contributed to market volatility, and a growing 
trend towards deregulation, both of which pose 
risks for the financial sector. Despite these global 
uncertainties, individual institutions showed 
resilience throughout the reporting period. The 
PA focused on enhancing credit, market and 
operational risk-related measures aimed at 
strengthening the regulation, supervision and risk 
management of banks. Systemically important 
banks and large insurers remained well-
capitalised, profitable and had sufficient liquidity 
for the year under review. The number of 
non-systemic entities under resolution was 
unchanged from last year, and increased 
supervision was applied to institutions that did 
not fully meet regulatory standards.
Resilience
Effective supervision fosters resilience by ensuring that 
financial institutions are prepared to navigate uncertainties 
and mitigate risks. In 2024, the flavour-of-the-year topic 
focused on strategic business growth and the resilience of 
regulated financial institutions’ business models in the current 
economic environment. The objective was for financial 
institutions to review and refine their strategic business 
models and processes and provide information to the PA to 
help inform further regulatory and supervisory work that may 
be required. The assessment identified potential risks, 
vulnerabilities and inefficiencies within the financial institutions’ 
operations, which will allow the PA to take proactive 
measures to mitigate these risks.
The engagements with senior management and their 
respective boards confirmed that financial institutions and 
market infrastructures (MIs) regularly review their strategic 
plans to align business models with market trends, 
competitive landscapes, regulatory changes and growth 
objectives. Key risks, such as macroeconomic conditions 
and digital capabilities, underline the necessity for strategic 
plans to adapt to market changes. Additionally, integrating 
ESG frameworks has become increasingly crucial to ensure 
sustainable growth and manage risks. 
In the effort to tackle money laundering and combat terrorism 
financing, resilience involves anticipating threats and adapting 
strategies to safeguard financial ecosystems. Effective, 
proportionate and dissuasive sanctions were imposed for 
non-compliance with the Financial Intelligence Centre Act 38 
of 2001 (FIC Act), and the remedial actions undertaken by 
supervised institutions were monitored. These measures 
contributed to an upgrade of the FATF greylisting action 
items in February 2025, supporting South Africa’s attempts 
to be removed from the FATF greylist.
Regulatory strategy progress
The PA refined its strategy to ensure it aligns with the SARB 
strategy. As part of this effort, the PA extended its 2021–24 
Regulatory Strategy until 31 March 2025. The regulatory 
strategy, aimed at maintaining a safe and sound financial 
system, outlines the PA’s key priorities. 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   61 
Deposit-taking financial institutions
Banks
The final proposed amendments to the regulations 
relating to the Basel III post-crisis reforms were 
approved internally and will be submitted to the 
Minister of Finance for final approval. These 
standards relate to credit, market and operational 
risks faced by banks. 
The adjustment to the draft Prudential Standards 
on Market Risk and Credit Valuation and 
corresponding documentation were approved  
on 27 November 2024 and submitted to the 
Minister of Finance on 27 December 2024 for 
tabling before Parliament. The PA intends to 
implement the revised Fundamental Review of the 
Trading Book and Credit Valuation Adjustment 
(CVA) frameworks by 1 July 2025.
With effect from 1 February 2025, all Banker’s 
Acceptance (BA) returns and related instructions 
for completion were removed from the 
Regulations relating to Banks and reissued under 
Directive 1 of 2025. The change allows the PA 
greater flexibility to update reporting requirements 
and streamline regulatory reporting via the Umoja 
technology platform, used to gather data from 
regulated entities.
Mutual banks
The PA is developing prudential standards 
covering governance, risk management, 
operational risk management, credit risk, liquidity risk, 
interest rate risk in the banking book, capital and 
economic returns. This is in response to the evolving 
nature, size, complexity and risk profile of mutual 
banks. These standards will be published for 
consultation in 2026.
Co-operative banks and financial 
institutions
A regulatory framework for CFIs and co-operative banks is 
being developed. The framework proposes a proportional 
approach to regulating the co-operative banking sector 
based on its size, complexity and risk profile. The PA has 
reviewed and updated prudential standards for CFIs and 
co-operative banks covering registration and operational 
requirements, governance, risk management and financial 
soundness.
The PA and the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) 
are working together to convert the prudential standards 
on governance and risk management into joint standards. 
The prudential standards on registration and operational 
requirements, financial soundness requirements and the 
joint standards on governance and risk management 
requirements will be published for consultation towards 
the end of 2025.
Co-operative banks were granted exemptions from  
certain provisions in the CBA that relate to the regulatory 
treatment of loans pertaining to CODI.
Strengthening and enhancing prudential regulatory and supervisory frameworks
62 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Financial conglomerates
The PA continues to monitor the implementation of 
the prudential standards for financial conglomerates 
which came into effect on 1 January 2022. These 
include: 
 › Prudential Standard FC02: Intragroup Transactions 
and Exposures for Financial Conglomerates; 
 › Prudential Standard FC03: Auditor Requirements 
of Financial Conglomerates; 
 › Prudential Standard FC04: Governance and Risk 
Management for Financial Conglomerates; and 
 › Prudential Standard FC05: Risk Concentration for 
Financial Conglomerates. 
The draft Prudential Standard FC01: Capital 
Requirements for Financial Conglomerates has 
undergone field testing since 2022. The PA has 
reviewed the regulatory reporting from financial 
conglomerates based on the draft capital standard. 
Based on the findings, further changes to the draft 
standard may not be required. The PA will finalise the 
standard, with formal consultation commencing in 
the latter part of 2025. The supervisory framework 
for financial conglomerates is already in effect and 
will undergo refinements to incorporate details of the 
capital requirements standard.
 
Significant owners
The PA conducts annual assessments of the fitness 
and propriety of significant owners of specific 
financial institutions and continues to monitor the 
significant ownership framework.
Market infrastructures
The draft Joint Standard relating to the criteria for 
exempting an external central counterparty or external 
trade repository was tabled in Parliament in January 
2025. This draft Joint Standard aligns with the G20’s 
expectations and represents a key milestone in South 
Africa’s commitment to mandating central clearing of 
OTC derivative transactions.
In July 2024, the draft Joint Standard on Minimum 
Requirements for MIs recovery plans was published for 
public consultation. This standard proposes minimum 
compliance requirements for MIs in creating and 
implementing their recovery plans, ensuring a reasonable 
chance of recovery following any threat to their 
operations.
Insurers
The draft Standard on Public Disclosure under section 45 
of the Insurance Act 18 of 2017 mandates insurers to 
disclose specific quantitative and qualitative information. 
The PA sought extensive consultation to refine this 
standard, which is currently under internal review.
The draft Standard on Liquidity Risk Management for 
Insurers was circulated for public consultation in 2024, 
with further consultations held with specific insurers for 
additional refinements. The standard addresses concerns 
that non-traditional insurance activities are not adequately 
covered by the existing liquidity risk framework as 
outlined in the Prudential Standard on the Financial 
Soundness Standards for Insurers (FSI) 6.
Joint Standard 1 of 2024: Outsourcing by Insurers  
was issued to the industry and came into effect on  
1 December 2024. The standard was developed 
specifically for insurers. The PA and FSCA are in the 
process of developing a cross-cutting third-party risk 
management standard for all supervised financial 
institutions. During the course of 2025, the PA and the 
FSCA will publish a notification form that allows insurers 
to submit the necessary information to both authorities 
under the joint standard. 
In November 2024, the PA and FSCA published Joint 
Communication 7 of 2024, which sought to:
 › clarify the current regulatory position regarding the 
funeral insurance market;
 › highlight specific concerns of the authorities regarding 
both the funeral parlour industry and the distribution of 
funeral insurance in relation to the current regulatory 
position and market practices;
 › provide details about an inter-regulatory project initiated 
by the authorities to review the framework for 
distributing funeral insurance in South Africa; and
 › invite participation in the project to ensure an inclusive 
regulatory framework that protects policyholders while 
encouraging sustainable market development for the 
funeral insurance sector.
Implementing and enhancing prudential 
regulatory and supervisory frameworks
The SARB’s performance   |   Prudential regulation continued
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   63 
Following South Africa’s greylisting, the FATF issued 
an action plan that required various stakeholders to 
address specific deficiencies. One of the outstanding 
action items was the effective implementation and 
follow-up of remedial actions issued after AML/CFT 
inspections were conducted at supervised entities in 
terms of the FIC Act. The feedback from the African 
FATF Joint Group responsible for reviewing and 
analysing progress on this action item has been  
largely positive.
The PA processed several enforcement matters 
relating to FIC Act non-compliance and monitored 
the progress of remedial actions undertaken by 
banks, life insurers and life microinsurers to ensure 
the effective execution of the remedial actions issued 
by the PA.
Supporting financial innovation and new 
technologies 
The PA promotes responsible innovation through its 
continued participation in the Intergovernmental 
Fintech Working Group (IFWG). The BCBS consulted 
on amendments to its framework for the prudential 
treatment of banks’ crypto asset exposures. The 
revised framework was published in 2024. 
The PA is drafting a prudential standard on banks’ 
crypto asset exposures, which is expected to be 
published for consultation in 2026. 
Discussion within the PA about an explicit policy and 
regulatory framework focused on using and applying 
AI in the financial sector is at a preliminary stage and is 
being considered within the SARB’s AI Community 
of Practice (CoP). 
During 2024, the PA and the FSCA conducted a 
survey about the materiality of the adoption of AI in 
financial institutions. This study aims to investigate the 
AI landscape within South Africa’s financial sector, 
focusing on safety and soundness, consumer 
protection and financial stability. The results of the 
survey are being analysed and is expected to be 
released in 2025.
The Joint Standard on IT Governance and Risk 
Management took effect on 15 November 2024.
The joint standard sets out the IT governance and risk 
management principles that financial institutions must 
adhere to, which align with sound practices and 
processes for managing IT risks.
The Joint Standard on Cybersecurity and Cyber Resilience 
comes into effect on 1 June 2025. 
From 1 April 2026, the PA will begin its 
responsibilities of prudentially regulating and 
supervising retirement funds, CISs and CIS 
managers. The PA and FSCA will publish joint 
communication about the transition in 2025. 
Additionally, research on the friendly societies 
sector is being conducted to guide the future 
regulatory and supervisory regime.
Enhancing AML/CFT supervision and 
implementing the FATF Mutual Evaluation 
recommendations
Developing cross-sectoral regulatory 
instruments for harmonising requirements 
across different industries
Developing an approach to the prudential 
regulation of pension funds, collective 
investment schemes and friendly societies
Other priorities
64 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
How the PA is governed
Operational structure
The PA consists of four departments:
Guidance notes
The PA has issued four guidance notes focused on 
climate-related disclosures, governance and risk 
practices for banks and insurers. The guidance 
notices seek to provide consistency on evolving 
practices, promote transparency and ensure 
international alignment on current climate-related risk 
practices and voluntary disclosures. The PA will 
monitor the implementation through continuous 
supervision and will keep contributing to global and 
domestic developments in climate-related disclosures 
where relevant. This includes considerations for 
assurance and transition plans.
Sustainable finance
The PA is actively observing sustainable finance 
market developments to inform local and 
international policy standards. It participates in 
climate-related discussions, surveys, papers  
and working groups of the FSB, BCBS, IAIS, 
and the NGFS.
Financial inclusion
The PA continues to support financial inclusion through 
various initiatives aligned with its core statutory 
mandate. These initiatives include regulation, 
supervision, data collection and stakeholder 
collaboration. With South Africa hosting the G20 in 
2025, the PA serves on the Global Partnership for 
Financial Inclusion
.
Transformation
The PA engages banks on their commitments and 
progress under the Financial Sector Charter Code and 
monitors insurers’ adherence to their internal 
transformation plans.
Risk Support Department
This department provides regulatory and supervisory 
support for credit, operational, market, insurance, 
and asset and liability management risks. 
Additionally, it assists with quantitative and actuarial 
analysis as well as financial institution statistics from 
an industry perspective.
Banking and Insurance 
Supervision Department
This department is responsible for the prudential 
supervision of medium- to smaller-sized banks, 
insurance companies, CFIs, and securities and 
derivatives MIs on a solo or consolidated basis.
Policy, Statistics and Industry 
Support Department
This department oversees policy formulation and the 
implementation of regulatory and supervisory 
frameworks. It also provides operational support, 
industry analysis and technical support for capital 
and accounting requirements, in addition to support 
for legal administration and enforcement 
responsibilities.
Financial Conglomerate 
Supervision Department
This department is responsible for consolidated 
prudential supervision of larger, diverse and complex 
financial groups, including institutions designated as 
financial conglomerates. It is also responsible for the 
AML/CFT supervision of banks, co-operative banks, 
mutual banks and life insurers.
The PA’s approach to financial inclusion  
and transformation
Developing regulatory and supervisory 
approaches to climate risks
The SARB’s performance   |   Prudential regulation continued
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                  65 
Governance structure
Prudential Committee
PruCo, established under the FSR Act, ensures the effective management and 
administration of the PA. It has the authority to create and define the functions of 
any other subcommittees it deems necessary.
The committee serves as the advisory and decision-making body on policy, 
regulatory and supervisory matters, following clearly defined terms of reference, 
policies and delegation of authority. To evaluate and improve its performance, the 
committee may conduct an annual self-evaluation exercise.
During the review period, the committee held eight meetings, including a strategy session 
for the 2024/25 financial year. 
During the period, PruCo:
• Approved the proposed PA budget for 2025/26 and the expenditure estimate for the 
following two financial years, including proposed amendments to Schedule 1 of the 
Financial Sector and Deposit Insurance Levies Act 11 of 2022. 
• Approved the removal of all BA returns from the Regulations relating to Banks, to be 
reissued under Directive 1 of 2025 for greater flexibility in updating reporting 
requirements. 
• Approved proposed amendments to the Regulations relating to Banks on the 
remaining Basel III post-crisis reforms. The committee also approved, for consultation, 
the Statement of Need, expected impact and intended operation of these 
amendments, the respective comment matrices and the proposed Directive. 
• Approved the prudential standards on the revised market risk and CVA frameworks for 
tabling in Parliament. 
• Approved the Resolution Authority Prudential Standard RA03: Flac Instrument 
Requirements for designated institutions. 
• Approved Joint Standard 1 of 2024: Outsourcing by insurers. 
• Approved the Prudential Standard FSI 6: Liquidity Risk Management for Insurers for 
public consultation. 
• Approved Joint Standard 2 of 2024: Cybersecurity and Cyber Resilience for financial 
institutions. 
• Approved the Prudential Standard CODI 1: Fund Liquidity, relating to the funds that 
banks holding covered deposits must maintain in the account for purposes of the fund 
liquidity of CODI’s funding model. 
 
Chairperson
Governor of the SARB
Members
DGs, with one of the DGs also being 
the CEO of the PA
Standing invitees16
16  P A heads of department and Head of FinStab
66 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Payments: The foundation of the financial system
Payments: The 
foundation of the 
financial system
The NPS, operated and regulated  
by the SARB, is crucial for the 
stability of the financial system and 
the economy. The SARB must stay 
abreast of global payment trends 
and respond to public demands  
for payment services that are  
safe, fast, accessible, convenient 
and affordable.
To meet both current and future needs, the SARB must 
ensure that the NPS remains fit for purpose, as outlined in 
the National Payment System Framework and Strategy 
Vision 2025 (Vision 2025). The SARB is also exploring 
initiatives to promote the vital goal of financial inclusion.
Broadening access to payments
Regulatory reforms aimed at broadening access to the 
NPS are essential for promoting financial inclusion and 
enhancing system efficiency. The NPS Act, while 
foundational, has its limitations, particularly in allowing 
non-banks to offer services such as e-money and 
remittances, or to access clearing and settlement services 
independently. In response, the SARB and NT published a 
policy paper in 2018, which led to the drafting of the NPS 
Bill. Once passed, this Bill will modernise the NPS, 
improve stability and promote financial inclusion, in line 
with Vision 2025.
Additionally, an Exemption Notice has been developed to 
permit non-bank payment service providers to offer 
services such as e-money and remittances without 
classifying them as bank activities under the Banks Act. 
This will lower entry barriers for new participants and 
enable broader participation. A comprehensive regulatory 
framework will accompany the Exemption Notice to ensure 
that non-bank providers are effectively regulated and 
supervised. These measures, currently open for 
consultation, will enhance access to the NPS, contributing 
to a more inclusive, secure and efficient financial system.
Modernising the ecosystem
The PEM initiative is a strategic effort by the SARB to 
address the evolving needs of South Africa’s payment 
system. Recognising the gap between global payment 
innovations and local infrastructure, the SARB seeks to 
modernise South Africa’s payment landscape to make 
it more efficient, competitive and resilient. The multi-
year initiative will tackle issues such as the continued 
reliance on cash and inefficient payment methods 
among digitally excluded and underserved 
communities, while also resolving structural 
inefficiencies within the current NPS framework.
An important feature of the PEM strategy is the 
repositioning of payment schemes to bring the 
management of payments back under the SARB’s 
leadership. Establishing a national payments utility 
(NPU) is another key priority to accelerate digital 
transformation for the public good, with the SARB 
actively negotiating with BankservAfrica and its 
shareholders to acquire a 50% stake in the company. 
This ownership will enable the development of digital 
infrastructure that supports new participants and 
enhances payment security.
As digital payments continue to grow, the SARB plans 
to develop a robust Digital Financial Identity (DFID) 
system to streamline user verification, enhance security 
and combat fraud. This system is crucial for ensuring 
secure and efficient payments and will support 
government projects, such as the National Digital 
Identity initiative. The PEM programme for the 2025/26 
financial year includes several key projects, such as 
designing new RTGS systems, expanding the fast 
payment system (FPS) and creating a comprehensive 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   67 
fraud management framework. Through these 
efforts, the SARB aims to future-proof the payment 
ecosystem, meeting the evolving needs of 
individuals and businesses and contributing to a 
safer, more efficient and accessible financial 
system. 
Insights into consumer 
payment patterns
In September 2024, the SARB published its 
inaugural Payments Study to better understand 
consumer behaviour and the factors influencing the 
use of different payment methods in South Africa. 
The study provides valuable insights into how 
access, pricing and convenience impact consumer 
choices. It was based on two surveys, the Diary of 
Consumer Payment Choice and the Survey of 
Consumer Payment Choice, which gathered both 
qualitative and quantitative data from over 7 500 
respondents nationwide.
Key findings revealed that while cash remains 
widely used, it is primarily for low-value 
transactions, whereas digital payment methods and 
cards are preferred for higher-value payments. The 
study also highlighted the need for greater financial 
literacy, as data collected indicated that some 
consumers hold misconceptions about the 
requirements for accessing financial products such 
as debit cards.
The SARB will conduct the next study in 2026 to 
assess the impact of some of the regulatory and 
PEM reforms outlined in this report. These insights 
will help stakeholders in the payments ecosystem 
better design offerings that improve consumer 
experience, drive greater adoption of digital 
payments and support a more inclusive, efficient 
financial system.
With Vision 2025 nearing its end, the SARB is now 
working on formulating a new vision and strategy for 
payments. Vision 2025 was designed to support financial 
inclusion for all South Africans by achieving nine specific 
goals. These goals include establishing a clear and 
transparent regulatory and governance framework for 
banks and non-banks, promoting competition and 
innovation, ensuring cost-effectiveness and improving 
interoperability in the NPS.
Various stakeholders are being consulted to help create a 
vision that will deliver a world-class, globally competitive, 
sustainable, safe and efficient payment system. The 
SARB intends to finalise the new vision in the second half 
of 2025 and begin implementation in 2026.
The new financial year will be pivotal as regulatory 
reforms to integrate non-bank players into the system will 
move into the implementation phase. At the same time, 
advancements in PEM projects, such as the 
establishment of the NPU, the DFID and expansion of the 
FPS, will help reshape South Africa’s payment landscape.
Further, to ensure the successful rollout of faster digital 
payments, the SARB will focus on aligning and 
harmonising policy, licensing and supervision practices. 
This will help prevent delays in and fragmentation of the 
market and facilitate the smooth adoption of the new 
payment infrastructure.
Looking ahead
Strategic 
initiatives
Key  
milestones
Establishment of 
the NPU
Optimisation and 
sustainability of the 
domestic and 
regional RTGS 
systems 
Amendment of the 
NPS Act
Enabling regulatory 
frameworks
Implementation of 
future-fit payments 
platforms
The acquisition of BankservAfrica, which 
is subject to the requisite approvals, 
along with the implementation of interim 
NPU governance arrangements, is 
scheduled for the 2025/26 financial year. 
Version 9 of SAMOS will be 
implemented by November 2025 and 
will ensure that the domestic RTGS 
complies with current high-value 
payment system usage guidelines for 
all payment settlement messages.
The NPS Bill is expected to be tabled 
in Parliament by December 2025, with 
promulgation expected in 2026.
The SARB will enable greater access 
to the NPS through an Exemption 
Notice from the Banks Act and the 
establishment of a regulatory 
framework for non-banks by  
December 2025.
The architecture requirements and 
roadmaps to drive replacement efforts 
are expected to be defined and 
finalised, with the incremental 
implementation of systems, products 
and services between 2026 and 2028.
2025
2026
Strategic milestones 
Policy implementation   |   Prudential regulation continued
Fintech in focus
The SARB’s Fintech Unit collaborates 
proactively with both internal and 
external stakeholders to unpack 
fintech developments and gain a 
deeper understanding of the policy 
and regulatory implications of fintech 
in financial services. 
The Fintech Unit continues to support the IFWG 17 Innovation 
Hub which promotes responsible innovation in South Africa. The 
Hub consists of three units, namely the Innovation Accelerator, 
the Regulatory Guidance Unit (RGU) and the Regulatory 
Sandbox (RSB). The RSB provides a controlled environment to 
test innovative solutions within existing and future regulatory 
frameworks. In the past year, four use cases were approved for 
testing in the RSB, with three completing testing and one being 
granted an extension. The RGU provided guidance to market 
innovators on financial sector regulation from the 30 enquiries it 
received. Two-thirds of these enquiries related to products or 
services still at ideation stage. Details can be found at the 
IFWG’s RGU.
18
The Innovation Accelerator drives both market-facing innovation 
initiatives that offer potential benefits to the regulatory and 
broader financial services sector.
Areas of focus
Crypto assets
The Fintech Unit, through the IFWG’s Crypto Assets Regulatory 
Working Group, monitors crypto market developments. In March 
2025, the IFWG published two reports on crypto assets. The 
first provides progress on the implementation of the 
recommendations outlined in the IFWG’s 2021 Position Paper on 
Crypto Assets. The second report, a South African Stablecoin 
Landscape Diagnostic, provides an overview of current ZAR-
pegged stablecoin arrangements.
Open finance
The IFWG’s Open Finance Integration Working Group (OPI WG) 
continued research on an open finance roadmap for South 
Africa, focused on competition dynamics to better understand 
ways to mitigate anti-competition behaviours. The OPI WG also 
initiated a cost-benefit analysis on the feasibility of implementing 
open finance in South Africa. The work will culminate in a policy 
position and roadmap, due for publication in the second half  
of 2025. 
17   The members of the IFWG ar e NT, the Competition Commission, NCR, PA, FIC, FSCA, the South African Revenue Service (SARS) and the SARB.
18
  IFWG | The Innovation Hub. Insights fr
om the IFWG’s Regulatory Guidance Unit. March 2025. https://www.ifwg.co.za/Reports/IFWG%27s%20Regulatory%20
Guidance%20Unit%20Report%20March%202025.pdf
19 
  The G20 T
echSprint is an annual hackathon co-organised by the G20 Presidency and BIS Innovation Hub.
Central bank digital currencies
The rapid evolution of technology and digital payments has 
prompted the SARB to look at the feasibility of issuing a central 
bank digital currency (CBDC). A dedicated CBDC Working 
Group has been established to explore these matters and a 
discussion paper is due towards the end of 2025. 
Artificial intelligence in financial 
services
The financial services sector’s adoption of AI brings both 
opportunities and risks, highlighting the importance of 
regulators and policymakers to promote its safe use. The 
Fintech Unit has set up an internal AI CoP to coordinate and 
collaborate on research into the policy and regulatory 
implications of AI in the financial sector. The AI CoP will 
accelerate research and support SARB departments in 
unpacking the risks, opportunities and policy implications of AI. 
G20 TechSprint 2025
Under South Africa’s G20 Presidency, the SARB is collaborating 
with the BIS Innovation Hub to host the sixth G20 TechSprint
19 
in May, featuring a global competition. This event seeks 
top-notch technological innovations that address global 
regulatory challenges and priorities, concluding with the 
announcement of the competition winners. Open to innovators 
worldwide, the G20 TechSprint focuses on technology solutions 
that enhance trust and integrity in open finance.
The SARB’s performance   |   Fintech in focus
68 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   69 
G20: Leading the 
Finance Track
South Africa successfully concluded 
its BRICS Presidency in December 
2023 and took on the G20 
Presidency in December 2024, 
under the theme ‘Solidarity, Equality 
and Sustainability’.
The Presidency lasts for a year, ending in December 2025 
when South Africa hands over the baton to the US. South 
Africa is the first African country and fourth consecutive 
emerging market country to lead the G20,  
also marking the final nation before member rotation  
begins anew.
The SARB co-leads the Finance Track alongside the Ministry 
of Finance. It actively participated in three working groups 
which focus on (i) policy coordination to promote strong, 
sustainable, balanced and inclusive global growth;  
(ii) the promotion of a more stable, resilient and balanced 
international financial architecture; and (iii) sustainable 
finance to ensure global growth and stability,  
by promoting transitions to greener, resilient and  
inclusive economies.
The SARB and NT develop the priorities for the Finance 
Track, which the G20 focuses on during South Africa’s 
Presidency.
The SARB oversees the Financial Sector Issues (FSI) Work 
Programme and sets priorities for its Presidency in 
consultation with the FSB, the lead international 
organisation specifically created by the G20 to carry out 
this work. In addition, the BIS contributes to the FSI Work 
Programme with the key objective to strengthen the 
resilience of the global financial system. During South 
Africa’s Presidency, the Committee on Payments and 
Market Infrastructures will be a key partner, especially 
given the strong focus on cross-border payments.
The FSI Work Programme will focus on assessing risks 
and vulnerabilities in the financial system. It will examine 
non-bank financial intermediation, cybersecurity and cyber 
resilience, cross-border payments, crypto assets, 
exponential technologies, AI and the review of the 
implementation of FSB recommendations to date.
To promote regional economic and financial integration in 
the SADC and Africa, the SARB serves as the Secretariat 
of the CCBG which is chaired by the Governor, as well as 
the Common Monetary Area. In these bodies, the SARB 
collaborates with the relevant countries to develop 
strategies that would support regional economic and 
financial integration in the region. The strategic focus 
areas of these regional bodies largely align with those of 
the G20. The SARB also actively participates in the 
Association of African Central Banks, which aims to 
promote cooperation in the monetary, banking and 
financial sectors across Africa.

The SARB’s performance   |   People matters
70 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB prioritises attracting and 
retaining capable and skilled 
employees to fulfil its mandate of 
maintaining price stability. The 
SARB’s people strategy aims to 
build an engaged, professional and 
resilient workforce, driven by 
purpose and excellence in serving 
the people of South Africa. 
Its employee value proposition (EVP) is based on serving the 
public good, offering development opportunities and ensuring 
organisational stability in an inclusive and diverse environment. 
The SARB is committed to building a workforce and 
leadership with the necessary expertise and a deep 
understanding of economic and financial matters.
The SARB’s 
2 640 employees bring diverse knowledge 
and skills that help the organisation achieve its mandate and 
supporting objectives. 
Employee salaries amounted to  
R3.4 billion (2023/24: R3.2 billion). 
Spending on training and development  
to upskill and reskill staff amounted to 
R159.7 million (2023/24: R116.3 million). 
Of the total staff complement,  
85.7% (2023/24: 84.4%) are black and  
54.2% (2023/24: 54.7%) are women. 
The SARB has a low regrettable employee turnover, 
which at 1.2% for 2024/25 is well below the internal target 
of less than 4%.
People matters
Performance highlights
Embed the EVP in people processes
To drive the EVP , the SARB: 
•
 continues to bolster car
eer development, empowering 
employees to manage their own career paths, facilitated 
through Career Expos that showcased the SARB’s career 
management and development framework;
•
 conducted training sessions for all people managers, 
pr
oviding them the necessary toolkits to manage more 
effectively; and
•
 developed targeted social media campaigns to 
communicate the SARB’
s EVP message, which  
is ongoing.
Phase 1 of a new cloud-based solution to simplify 
and digitalise human resources processes was 
implemented on 1 November 2023, and included:
•
 moder
nising back-office systems and capabilities; and
•
 enhancing operational ef
ficiency by improving self-service 
functions.
•
 The final phase of the cloud solution began on 1 
March 
2024 and is progressing well, with full implementation 
expected by 1 September 2025.
As a central bank, the SARB has the expertise to maintain price 
and financial stability, regulate the rapid digital transformation of 
financial institutions, modernise the payment ecosystem and 
ensure the integrity of the currency.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   71 
Other performance highlights include:
Embedding a workforce plan
• The SARB Academy has been instrumental in pr omoting the development of skills identified in each department’s 
Strategic Workforce Plan (SWP). Impact assessments have shown improvements in performance in areas such as 
central banking, business disciplines, leadership and other relevant skills as a result of the training initiatives. These 
initiatives have received high satisfaction ratings from participants.
Strengthening culture and embedding the SARB Way of Work
• T o enhance the Bank’s culture, various initiatives such as webinars and workshops were introduced with the aim to 
foster personal, team and leadership effectiveness. As a result, the engagement score improved from 70.9% to 
72.2% in the 2024 Employee Engagement Survey (EES). There was also an increase in the culture and leadership 
driver scores from 75.2% to 76.4% and 66.6% to 69% respectively. Additionally, there was a 0.9% reduction in 
highly stressed employees. The survey found an improvement in the employee net promoter score from 29 to 32.
20
• W ebinars and workshops covered the following topics:
 › How do I multiply others and not diminish them?
 › An Invitation to Level Up | Atomic Habits
 › Mental Health Talk
 › Meeting Zen: strengthening a culture of meeting excellence.
•
 Key employee engagement platforms such as the Gover
nor’s staff meetings, BankIndaba, departmental staff 
meetings and town halls reinforced the Bank’s core values and culture, contributing towards improvements in the 
key trust indicators score from 51% to 51.8%. The score for leaders living the Bank’s values also improved 
from 59.8% to 62.4%. The SARB maintained its Platinum Seal of Achievement from the Deloitte Best 
Company Survey 2024. To address employee experience challenges identified in the EES, the SARB implemented 
organisation-wide action plans, including webinars and leadership development programmes.
•
 Individual departments and cash centr
es also developed their own action plans to address specific areas of 
improvement.
Creating a diverse and inclusive workplace
• The successful r eturn of the in-person Women@SARB seminar revitalised connections and provided a valuable 
platform for dialogue.
•
 The inaugural Pride Month event sparked meaningful conversations, pr
omoting inclusivity and empowerment.
•
 The D&I initiative has r
eached a critical phase, focusing on consciously cultivating an inclusive organisational culture. 
Following alignment sessions with all departments, clear guidelines have been established for integrating inclusion 
into daily operations, including planning, execution, interaction and engagement.
20  A positive employee net pr omoter score indicates that there are more ‘promoters’ than ‘detractors’ within the organisation. In other words, more employees 
are inclined to recommend the company as a good place to work. Globally, a score exceeding 10 is generally regarded as favourable.
Employee well-being
The SARB’s Occupational Health and Wellness team 
actively supports staff, resulting in improved health and 
better financial protection. 
 
Talent management and 
workforce planning
Talent management and workforce planning aim to 
develop a responsive and agile workforce in an evolving 
work environment. Eight postgraduates participated in 
the Graduate Development Programme, where they 
received training on central banking as well as personal 
and professional skills development.
 
•  Impr oved collaboration with external health 
partners through awareness campaigns focused on 
mental health and non-communicable diseases such 
as diabetes, hypertension and various types of cancer.
•
  A r
enewed focus on medical surveillance has 
resulted in early detection of health issues and advice 
on managing and preventing long-term illnesses.
2024/25 Performance highlights
2024/25 Performance highlights
2024/25 Performance highlightsTime to fill critical roles 
101 days
(target: < 90 days)
2023/24: 140 days
Critical roles turnover rate
0.8% target: < 4%  
2023/24: 0.4%Overall employee turnover rate
5.3% target: < 4%  
2023/24: 5.6%Regrettable employee turnover
1.2% target: < 4%  
2023/24: 1%Coverage ratio for critical roles
target: 85%  93%
2023/24: 91%
The SARB Academy offers tailored programmes that aim not 
only to enhance performance but also foster personal 
transformation, ultimately leading to a positive impact  
on business. 
The introduction of digital learning platforms has empowered 
staff to take ownership of their own development, acquiring 
skills such as data literacy, leadership and other relevant 
competencies.
Several workshops and webinars were held to support staff 
and leaders, focusing on building resilient and agile teams in 
an ever-changing environ
ment.
• T o support the SARB’s 2025–30 strategy formulation, 
several initiatives including a Strategy Bootcamp, Design 
Thinking sessions and Leader as a Collaborator workshops 
were conducted to outline the skills needed for the leaders.
•
 Some of the notable initiatives aimed at raising awar
eness 
across the SARB included webinars and workshops on 
building an ethical culture, reducing our carbon footprint and 
understanding the two-pot pension fund system.
•
 The SARB Academy also deliver
ed essential training on 
Lean Principles for the cash centres, aimed at improving 
operational efficiencies.
Learning and development
Through functional work assessments, the Occupational 
Health and Wellness team continues to provide 
guidance on managing and accommodating employees 
whose health affects their ability to fully perform their 
duties.
Travel Health Advisory Services continues to provide 
advice and vaccine administration to employees 
travelling abroad.
72 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   People matters continued
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   73 
Management and leadership training
Various management and leadership development programmes were conducted, focusing on the ‘Leading the SARB Way’ leadership 
competency framework. These included the Senior Management Programme, Specialist Leadership Journey, Transitions Programme, 
and coaching and mentorship opportunities.
A new leadership development 
programme was introduced to provide 
specialists with the necessary skills to lead 
teams.
A total of 95 senior-level specialists 
were trained and the programme 
received positive feedback. Delegates 
appreciated the chance to embrace their 
leadership roles and lead with confidence.
10 management and leadership 
development initiatives were delivered
341 employees 
attended one or more programmes, 
achieving an overall satisfaction rating of 
Absorption per Pipeline programme for the 2024/25 financial year: 
Pipeline programme Department Intake Absorbtion Absorbtion % Permanent Contract
Graduate 
Development 
Programme
Core Central 
Banking 8 7 88%
7
Data Science 
Development 
Programme
Core Central 
Banking 3 3 100%
3
Grow-IT BSTD 20 19 95% 2 17
Business Analysis BSTD 5 5 100% 5
CA Training 
Programme PA 2 2 100%
2
Central banking training
The SARB Academy focused on upskilling initiatives in line 
with the departmental SWP , including training in Power BI, 
macroprudential stress testing, bank resolution, the Central 
Banking Summit and policy drafting.
The 
Let’s Talk sessions, which focused on core  
and emerging central banking topics, were well-received,  
with discussions ranging from fintech and financial inclusion  
to climate change.
Learning Week motivated staff to take ownership  
of their own learning during work, using the digital  
resources available at the SARB, such as Udemy,  
Coursera and LinkedIn.
The 
Climate Change Skills Hub hosted  
quarterly in-person sessions.
Central banking masterclasses are being 
developed to build institutional knowledge management and 
retain critical skills in line with the SWP .
Pipeline programmes continued to equip young 
talent with critical skills. The Pipeline Strategy underpins the 
SARB’s SWP by proactively addressing and enabling the 
acquisition of current and future critical skills to meet its strategic 
workforce needs through these programmes.
94%
74 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   People matters continued
The total training spend was:
R159.7 million,
or 7% of the total payroll
(2023/24: R116.3 million –  
5.7% of the total payroll)
(2022/23: R69.7 million –  
3.5% of the total payroll)
Average spend  
per employee: 
R56 600
Digital learning
The Academy also hosted information sessions to showcase 
its customised content, including RTGS introductory videos, 
Introduction to Central Banking e-learning, PA Climate Task 
Team workshop video, Financial Markets Trade Settlements 
e-learning, Non-fiscal Risk Induction and Information-Sharing, 
Programme SKY-Denodo, ISO training, Cyber Security and 
Engineering Standard Operating Procedures. 
Information 
webinars on ethics were also held during the reporting period.
The SARB Academy offers three learning platforms: Additionally:
74%  
LinkedIn
95%  
Udemy
64%  
Coursera
adoption rate
79%  
employees are 
satisfied with the 
learning platforms
89%  
employees believe that 
their learning aligns with 
their individual 
development plans.
2 647 employees 
attended training, including 
those employees that left 
the SARB during the 
period under review.
94% 95%
2 681
99%
2 437
2024/25 2023/24 2022/23
% of the total workforce
Women
54%
Men
46%
Persons with disability 
0.3%
Average training spend per 
employee
(R’000)
2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25
16.3
29.7
28.5
43.4
56.6
Total training spend
(R’m)
2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25
37.6
68.2
69.7
116.3
159.7
% of employees who received training:
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   75 
Training spend as a 
percentage of payroll:
Race of employees trained:
2024/25
2023/24
2022/23
2021/22
2020/21
7%
5.7%
3.5%
3.3%
4%
2 647
African
1 974
Coloured
213
Indian
148
White
312
76 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   People matters continued
Employee statistics 
2024/25
Headcount over ﬁve years
(number of permanent employees excluding contractors)
   Black       White       Men       Women
2023/24 2 507  Employee complement     
1 136
3932 114
1 371
2024/25 2 640  Employee complement     
1 209
3782 262
1 431
2022/23   Employee complement     
1 097
4201 961
2 381
1 284
2021/22   Employee complement     
1 053
4421 863
2 305
1 252
2020/21   Employee complement     
1 059
4801 771
2 251
1 192
< 25 years 25–30 years 31–35 years 36–40 years 41–45 years 46–50 years 51–55 years > 55 years
Age group breakdown – Total number of employees 2 640
1%
27
16.2%
427
8.3%
222
19.5%
515
19.5%
514
15.7%
414
13.3%
350
6.5%
171
 Average age: 42 years (2023/24: 42 years)
Years of service  
breakdown
Average years of service: 10 years (2023/24: 11 years)
0–1 year
2–4 years
5–10 years
11–20 years
21–30 years
31–40 years
> 40 years
19.6%
23.6%
10.8%
5.5%
0.1%
18.4%
22%
Employment equity profile
African
Coloured
Indian
White
 
0.4% 0.6%
71.2%
8.4%
6.1%
14.3%
32.7%
4.3%
2.7%
6.1%
38.5%
4.1%
3.4%
8.2%
54.2%45.8%
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   77 
Persons with
disability

78 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   People matters continued
SARB Retirement Fund
The SARB Retirement Fund is a single scheme that 
provides a full spectrum of pension benefits to the 
employees of the SARB, SABN and SA Mint. 
On 31 March 2025,  
the 
SARB Retirement Fund had 
3 566  
contributing members,
 164  
preserved members, 
1 268 life annuitants,  
(126 life annuities transferred from the former  
SARB Pension Fund and now ring-fenced within  
the SARB Retirement Fund), 
90  
living annuitants,  
and deferred retirees (members who have retired 
from the Group but not from the fund). 
The fund’s 
total liability amounted to 
R11.57 billion at year-end.
The year in review was marked by urgent preparation for the 
implementation of the two-pot retirement system, which began 
on 1 September 2024. Preparations to ensure all legislative 
requirements were met, and that the administrator was ready, 
included, among other actions, the drafting and approval of rule 
amendments, roadshows to members, updating of all relevant 
written communication and member information, system 
configuration and training of the administration staff. The intention 
of the two-pot retirement system was to improve retirement 
outcomes by allowing members access to their retirement 
savings without having to resign from employment. Given the 
country’s tough economic climate, a substantial number of 
members have seized the opportunity. As at 31 March 2025, 
approximately 1 200 members had withdrawn from their savings 
pot and all had drawn the maximum. 
Statutory actuarial valuations are performed every three years 
and interim actuarial valuations annually. The last statutory 
actuarial valuation was as at 31 March 2024 and found the fund’s 
financial position to be sound. The next statutory actuarial 
valuation will be based on the audited financial statements for the 
year ended 31 March 2027. More details regarding the fund’s 
activities will be available with the release of the fund’s annual 
report for the year ending 31 March 2025, expected in 
September 2025.
The Board of Trustees actively monitors changes in the retirement 
industry, including any relevant legislative changes. The Board 
delegates several of its functions to subcommittees that are 
governed in line with section 7D (2)(a) of the Pension Funds Act 
24 of 1956. Each subcommittee has its terms of reference which 
set out its scope of work.
Members are kept informed using roadshows, circulars and  
fund booklets. The fund’s operations are regularly reviewed to 
ensure compliance with legislative changes and leading 
retirement fund practices.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   79 
The 2025–30 I&T strategy aims to enhance the 
use of innovative, strategic and trusted data and 
technology, while delivering robust and resilient 
business solutions. 
Key goals of the 2030 I&T strategy are to:
•
 successfully deliver digital transformation;
•
  pr
omote the use of data through improved 
information and data management 
technology and practices;
•
  enable, support, gover
n and secure 
business and technology solutions and AI; 
and
•
  cultivate innovation, supported by a futur
e-fit 
digital workforce.
Looking ahead
Information and 
technology
I&T are essential for effective 
business management and timely 
decision-making. With rapid 
technological advancements, 
businesses have new 
opportunities for optimisation and 
transformation across all 
operations. As these innovations 
become integrated into business 
solutions, we remain committed to 
ensuring strategic alignment and 
robust governance.
The I&T strategy is adaptable, ensuring ongoing alignment 
with the SARB’s strategy and objectives. Performance is 
evaluated through the I&T scorecard, focusing on:
•  successfully delivering large-scale transformational 
pr
ogrammes that support the SARB’s strategic and 
enablement focus areas, along with executing tactical 
projects and enhancement initiatives;
•
  enhancing the maturity of I&T pr
ocesses while 
maintaining sound governance, risk and compliance 
(GRC) management; and
•
  implementing r
obust measures for system security, 
stability, performance, availability and continuity.
2 640
80 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance  |   Information and technology continued
Execution of strategic projects
Achieving a 75% or higher execution rate for the portfolio of programmes is 
evident in the core department sections of this report.
Co-own and 
successfully deliver 
the SARB’s digital 
transformation 
strategy
Availability of mission-critical business 
applications
•  Pr oactive maintenance and monitoring have improved the stability of 
mission-critical business applications, achieving an uptime of 99.9%, 
surpassing the target of 99%.
•
  The Data Centr
e Project was successfully delivered, enabling two 
primary sites and a third disaster recovery site.
•
  The network perimeter security Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS) 
solution was successfully upgraded, r
esulting in heightened security 
and improved performance.
Secure, enable, 
sustain and 
support business 
systems and 
processes
Develop the 
SARB’s data  
assets through  
the effective 
integration of 
information 
management
•  Information management and gover nance continue to improve within 
core departments, maintaining a focus on streamlining the collection 
and storage of information.
•
  A data-sharing platform has been implemented to r
educe the 
duplication of data collection.
•
  Significant pr
ogress has been made in digitising prioritised 
departmental records centres, with 90% of the targeted records at 
Corporate Archives now completed.
•
  Established an AI policy to oversee the use of AI technologies, ensuring 
their r
esponsible and ethical development and application.
•
  A r
eview of the effectiveness of I&T governance structures recommended 
the creation of an integrated I&T GRC strategy, which is now being 
implemented.
•
  The overall I&T contr
ol environment remains adequate and effective and is 
further enhanced through periodic control self-assessments conducted in 
prioritised areas.
•
  Ther
e is a continued focus on maturing I&T governance processes, using 
the COBIT framework.
Enforce I&T 
governance and 
controls
•  The security postur e of the SARB Group continues to mature, building the 
capability, capacity and services to monitor and respond effectively to 
cyberthreats.
•
  Ther
e is a continuous effort to create resilient business solutions that meet 
stakeholder demands.
•
 Strategic workfor
ce planning is ongoing.
Continuously 
futureproof the 
technology and 
business workforce 
to use innovative 
solutions
01
02
03
04
05
2024/25 Performance highlights
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   81 
The general public
The SARB is a public entity with a constitutional 
mandate, making it essential for the public to view  
it as trustworthy. Building legitimacy through public 
engagement is crucial. The public is the SARB’s 
broadest stakeholder group and it regularly does 
public outreach programmes aimed at learners, 
teachers, university students, community groups  
and business entities. In 2024/25, the SARB reached 
over 6 500 people through these programmes.
To measure the effectiveness of these engagement 
initiatives, the SARB conducts a Corporate 
Reputation Survey every two years. The 2023/24 
survey results showed an improvement in the public’s 
awareness of the SARB, rising from 60% to 64%. 
However, knowledge of its role in society declined 
from 57% to 54%. Trust and advocacy, which reflect 
the public’s confidence in an institution and their 
readiness to speak positively about it, saw a minor 
decline. Overall satisfaction with the SARB  
also dropped from 61% to 58%.
Aligned with the SARB’s broader communications 
strategy, these initiatives will continue to focus on 
broadening engagement and making the SARB  
more accessible to the public by improving the  
quality and relevance of communication content.
Established 
stakeholders
According to the 2023/24 Corporate 
Reputation Survey, established 
stakeholders rated the SARB highly in 
all reputational metrics, including 
familiarity, favourability, trust and 
advocacy. The survey found that 
favourability and trust had improved 
slightly, while satisfaction with the SARB 
leadership remained high. The overall 
reputation index for established 
stakeholders stood strong at 84%.
Numerous stakeholder engagements 
are held throughout the year with labour 
unions and federations, business and 
industry bodies, academic institutions 
and political parties represented  
in Parliament, among  
other stakeholders.
Engaging the public
Transparency and accountability serve as crucial checks and balances 
to ensure that the central bank acts in the best interest of the country.
The SARB strives to promote accessibility, transparency and accountability by interacting with the public and other key 
stakeholders through various forums and events such as conferences, industry engagements, campaigns, educational 
programmes, digital platforms, publications and by responding to queries.
The SARB uses a range of platforms to enhance understanding of its work. It continually explores new methods to broaden 
its reach and engage with new audiences while maintaining relationships with its different stakeholders.
total stakeholder 
group
 participants
6 513
high school 
learners and 
educators
4 886
university 
students and 
lecturers
964
business 
community 
members
162
public lectures 
(by the SARB 
Governor)
501
82 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Engaging the public continued
Briefings to Parliament 
The SARB is accountable to Parliament and is required 
to present the SARB, PA and CODI annual reports to 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance 
each year. These presentations include the SARB’s 
performance against its mandate and functions, the 
macroeconomic overview, inflation outlook and key 
highlights from each annual report. The SARB last 
presented these reports in October 2024.
Following the general election in May 2024, the SARB 
conducted an induction session for new and returning 
Parliamentarians. The session focused on explaining 
the SARB’s mandate, its functions and its role among 
law makers.
The SARB also participated in a special joint session 
between the Portfolio Committee on Trade, Industry 
and Competition and the Standing Committee on 
Finance, along with all major banks and regulators, to 
discuss the state of the financial sector.
Monetary Policy Forum
The SARB releases its MPR twice a year at the 
Monetary Policy Forum. The MPR seeks to broaden  
the public’s understanding of monetary policy by 
discussing both domestic and international 
developments that impact it.
The Monetary Policy Forums and MPR releases took 
place on 23 April and 15 October 2024 and attracted a 
total of 318 in-person attendees and 708 attendees 
through streaming platforms.
Talk to the SARB Forums
In-person Talk to the SARB Forums are hosted in  
the major centres of each province to foster a better 
understanding of monetary policy and the role of the 
SARB. Attendees include government officials, 
representatives of financial institutions, academics, 
business and labour unions. During the period,  
854 stakeholders participated in the Talk to the  
SARB Forums.
Financial Stability Forums
The FSR Act mandates the SARB to evaluate the 
stability of South Africa’s financial system every six 
months by publishing the Financial Stability Review 
(FSR). According to Section 13 of the FSR Act the 
SARB must present the FSR in Parliament. Each edition 
is introduced at a Financial Stability Forum hosted by 
the Governor, DGs and senior SARB officials. In the 
2024/25 financial year, 221 attendees participated in 
the two forums.
Economic Roundtable
The SARB Economic Roundtable is a platform for 
in-depth discussions on economic matters. Chaired by 
the Governor, the Roundtable includes a diverse group 
of participants such as market economists, industry 
experts, research analysts, asset managers and 
policymakers. In 2024, 176 delegates attended three 
Economic Roundtables.

SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   83 
Digital and social media
The SARB uses social media to broaden its audience reach and share information. Using platforms such as X 
(formerly Twitter), LinkedIn, YouTube and Facebook, the SARB has improved its content by incorporating more 
videos, infographics and explanatory pieces to boost public understanding.
The SARB’s main information hub remains its official website and social media engagements are strategically used 
to drive traffic to this site.
LinkedIn
244 000
2023/24: 162 000
X
134 500
2023/24: 113 000
Facebook
48 000
2023/24: 48 000
2023/24: 1 400 000
16 300 000
2023/24: 7 600 000
Website
2 400 000
Active users
Page views
Internal stakeholders
SARB employees
Internal stakeholders are crucial to the success of the 
SARB. Engaging with them enhances the SARB’s 
effectiveness and helps achieve its mandated goals. 
Employee engagement ensures alignment with the 
organisation’s strategic objectives. Excellent internal 
communication channels build morale and create a 
positive work environment. An annual staff 
engagement survey measures staff sentiment towards 
the work culture.
The SARB will continue 
interacting with its 
stakeholders through 
existing platforms while 
exploring innovative, 
creative ways to increase 
exposure, ensure better 
accessibility and strengthen 
public confidence.
Looking 
ahead
84 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Investing in society
Investing in society
Through its CSI programme the SARB supports socioeconomic 
development and the upliftment of communities in South Africa.
The SARB’s CSI programme focuses on two broad areas – education and community development. In education, 
the SARB promotes knowledge of monetary policy and develops human capital in economics and financial 
journalism. This is achieved through its sponsorship of the annual school competition, the MPC Schools Challenge, 
and the University Chairs programme. The MPC Schools Challenge and university partnerships are closely aligned 
to the SARB’s primary mandate and strategic objectives. The SARB also runs an external bursary programme.
Its community development initiatives include the Employee Volunteerism (EV) and Support for the Arts programmes. 
Staff members are encouraged to participate in voluntary community activity, taking place annually and linked to 
Nelson Mandela Day. The arts programme sponsors two art students annually with the aim of fostering local creative 
art skills.
MPC Schools Challenge
The MPC Schools Challenge is the SARB’s flagship  
CSI initiative and targets Grade 12 learners who study 
economics and pure mathematics. First piloted in 
Gauteng in 2012 with the Department of Basic 
Education, the competition offers learners the 
opportunity to step into the shoes of SARB MPC 
members by writing an MPC statement. Submitted 
essays undergo a shortlisting process and those teams 
shortlisted present their statements to a panel of senior 
SARB economists, mimicking the SARB’s MPC press 
conference. Finalists are awarded various prizes, with 
the four members of the winning team receiving 
bursaries for further studies. 
During the period under review, learners, their 
educators and education officials from public and 
private schools attended briefing sessions across the 
country. The Gauteng session was hosted both 
in-person and virtually to accommodate schools unable 
to attend in person. 
2 123 460
attendees schools
These sessions attracted:
The winners of the 2024 Challenge
Panorama Secondary School (Mpumalanga)
The four winning team members all received bursaries and are studying full-time.
Name of student Race Gender Field of study
Ruth Tsakani Makadi Khoza Black South African Female BCom Accounting
  
Siphesihle Patience Nyudu Black South African Female BCom Economics and 
Econometrics
Gugulethu Princess Malapane Black South African Female Diploma, Accounting 
Molemo Candy Mabele Black South African Female BCom Economics and 
Econometrics 
Employee volunteerism
Through its EV programme, the SARB 
provides infrastructure support, 
maintenance and monetary donations to 
schools for learners with special needs.
The programme is tied to the annual 
Mandela Day and is run in all provinces. 
Where the SARB has offices, namely 
Pretoria, Johannesburg, Durban and 
Cape Town, employees and their families 
can volunteer their time on the Saturday 
closest to Mandela Day (18 July). 
In 2024, the EV programme, led by the 
Governors and executives, took place on 
20 July at Zodwa Special School and 
Don Mattera Special School in Gauteng, 
Ekuthuthukeni Special School in 
KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) and Oasis Special 
School in the Western Cape.
The focus was on schools for learners 
with intellectual disabilities. The SARB 
sponsored a further six schools in the 
provinces where it does not have 
physical operations.
Special school Area/Province Project
Don Mattera
Eldorado Park, 
Gauteng Classroom renovation
  
Zodwa
Atteridgeville, 
Gauteng Renovation of toilets
Oasis
Cape Town, Western 
Cape Playground
Ekuthuthukeni Umlazi, KZN Classroom renovation
Jane Furse Jane Furse, Limpopo Playground/multicourt
Learamele
Mothibistad, Northern 
Cape
Industrial washing 
machine, iron/dryer
Mantled Pankop, Mpumalanga Borehole and water 
purification system
Rorisang
Madikwe, North West Playground/multicourt
Khayalethu East London, Eastern 
Cape
Four smartboards 
(including training)
Mphatlalatsane Viljoenskroon, Free 
State Woodwork machinery
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                  87 85 
Policy implementation   |   Prudential regulation continued
86 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
External bursary programme
The SARB bursary scheme caters for students at tertiary institutions from first-year to postgraduate level and covers 
registration and tuition fees, a stipend and the cost of books and relevant study materials. 
 
In 2024, the SARB provided bursaries to 110 students, 35 of whom were in their first year of study. Nine of the students 
were pursuing their Master’s in Data Science and one was awarded a bursary to pursue an Art degree. Most of the 
bursars (85%) were from a previously disadvantaged background and 72 (65%) of them were women. 
For the 2025 academic year, 104 students were awarded bursaries, including 15 first-years. Among the bursars are two 
Art and nine Master’s in Data Science students. A total of 91 (88%) are from previously disadvantaged backgrounds and 
60% are female.
2025 Bursars’ fields of study
Men Women
African 
7534 41
Coloured
72 5
Indian
94 5
White
132 11
2025  
Bursars
104
40% 60%
42 62
Men Women
African 
7831 47
Coloured
80 8
Indian
83 5
White
164 12
2024  
Bursars
110
35% 65%
38 72
Accounting
Actuarial Science
Arts and Language
Commerce
Computer Science
Economic Science
Engineering
Finance
Health Science
Maths and Data 
Science
Law
Data Science 
(Masters)
2024 Bursars’ fields of study
* Per centages may not add up to 100 due to rounding.
16%
11%
2%
5%
7%
8%
6%
4%
3%
22%
7%
17%
8%
Accounting 19%21
17
Actuarial Science 14%15
11
Economic Science 6%7
2
Computer Science 3%3
5
Law
6%
8
8
Engineering 5%5
6
Maths and Data 
Science 6
4
Health Science 20%22
3
Arts and 
Language 4%4
23
Commerce 6%4
18
4
Finance 3%4
7
The SARB’s performance   |   Investing in society continued
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   87 
University Chairs
The SARB currently has three partnerships 
aimed at developing research programmes and 
support Master’s and PhD students housed at 
Wits, Rhodes University and UP . 
A Chair is appointed at the partner institution  
to coordinate and pursue research in monetary 
policy, and to enhance financial and economic 
journalism. Under the Chairs, several 
postdoctoral students from previously 
disadvantaged backgrounds are supervised.
University of Pretoria Chair  
of Monetary Economics
The SARB has been supporting the UP Chair of 
Monetary Economics for the past 12 years. The 
partnership is focused on macroeconomic research 
and developing human capital in monetary economics.
The Chair has ensured that monetary policy is 
integrated in the university’s Economics curriculum. 
This has resulted in the enrolment and supervision of a 
significant number of Honours, Master’s and PhD 
students. Collaboration with the SARB’s ERD further 
strengthens this relationship.
A SARB-UP MacroLab is being finalised, due for 
completion in 2025. It will provide a shared space for 
UP and SARB researchers to work, exchange ideas 
and deliver on their research agenda.
Publications 
and Working 
Papers
14
2 international    
   publications
2 national publications
10 working papers
Presentation  
at conferences
7
In 2024, researchers 
participated in and 
presented to national 
and international 
conferences and 
workshops.
Academic 
supervision
11  
PhD 
students
3 
Master’s
6 of the 11 PhD 
students are 
funded and 
supervised by the 
Chair 
(3 black,  
1 white, 1 coloured 
and 1 non-South 
African black).
Activities:
Dr Tumisang Loate, previously funded by the Chair, has been appointed as a full-time Senior Lecturer in the Department. 
Mr Charl van Schoor, a research fellow at the Chair, recently joined the SARB’s ERD.
Of the 11 PhD students supervised, six are funded through the Chair and are African students.
88 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Wits Journalism Chair
The SARB sponsors the Wits Centre for Journalism, providing support and 
funding for postgraduate training and qualifications in financial journalism. The 
programme enables aspirant and experienced journalists to improve their 
working knowledge of economics and finance.
It has made a significant contribution to training financial journalists and 
strengthening financial understanding and skills in the South African  
media space.
The programme has grown significantly, from an initial offering of a single 
course for working financial journalists to now providing a range of educational 
options. These include financial journalism courses at Master’s and Honours 
level and certificate courses aimed at community media.
Rhodes University Chair of Economic and Financial Journalism
The Centre for Economic Journalism at Rhodes University is home to the Chair of Economic and Financial Journalism. 
This partnership aims to enhance the quality of economic and financial reporting.
The Chair offers two postgraduate programmes – the postgraduate Diploma (PGDip) in Economics Journalism and 
the Economics Specialisation within the PGDip in Journalism. It also supports Master’s-level research in Economics 
and Financial Journalism and provides co-supervision for PhD candidates.
In 2024, 10 scholarships were granted to three black men and seven black women. However, one student withdrew 
from studies due to ill health. Five are registered for a Master’s degree, four for an Honours degree and one for a 
postgraduate Diploma PGDip. Four of the Master’s students are in their final year of study. All the Honours students 
passed with distinction.
In 2025, 12 scholarships will be awarded.
Male
4
Female
8
12 
Black South African
10 Master’s
1 PGDip in Economic Journalism
1 PGDip in Journalism
A 
breakdown 
of the  
scholarships
Number of 
students 
Gender Race Level of study Nationality 
34 19 Male
15 Female
30 black
3 White
1 Coloured
8 BA Hons 
15 Certificates in 
Financial 
Journalism
11 Certificates in 
Financial Literacy 
for Community 
Media 
30 South African
4 Namibian
Scholarships breakdown:
The SARB’s performance   |   Investing in society continued
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   89 
CSI expenditure
The total expenditure for the CSI programme in 2024/25 is R44 520 986, covering the MPC Schools Challenge, University 
Chairs and EV and External Bursary programmes.
2024/25 CSI spend
University of Pretoria 
(Chair in Monetary Economics)
R3 200 000
2023/24: R3 200 000
Rhodes University 
(Economic Journalism Programme)
R3 000 000
2023/24: R2 000 000
MPC Schools 
Challenge 
R6 000 000
2023/24: R6 000 000
Wits  
(Journalism Programme)
R2 000 000
2023/24: R1 000 000
Data Science and 
Machine Learning
R4 000 000
2023/24: R3 000 000
External bursaries
R24 000 000
2023/24: R22 000 000
Employee 
volunteerism
R4 000 000
2023/24: R3 000 000
Total expenditure R45 000 000  
2023/24: R44 510 152
Tracking former SARB bursars 
For the 2024 academic year, 
91% of SARB bursary recipients  
passed their exams.
The numbers have been rounded up to the nearest million.
90 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Graduation year Total Employed Not employed/Reason
2016 9 8 1 Studying PhD at UP
2017 14 14
2018 7 6 1 Studying PhD at UP; Research Assistant at NERSA
2019 7 6 1 Studying Master’s in Economics, Wits
2020 4 4
2021 9 5
2
Studying Discip Training – Potch
Studying Year 2 LLB – Wits
2 Studying FY BCom Hons – Wits
2022 29 23
3
Studying Master’s (Econ) – UP
Studying GDip in Acct – UCT
Studying LLB Degree – UP
3 Unemployed
2023 23 8
10 Interns Internships
4
Studying MSc – Wits
Studying CTA – UFS
1 Unemployed
2024 16 7
3 Graduate 
Programme
Two are part of the SARB Data Science
One is part of an International Programme
5 Unemployed
1 Pending 
response
The SARB’s performance   |   Investing in society continued
Tracking former SARB bursars
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   91 
Spending
Procurement spending with suppliers for the 2024/25 financial 
year amounted to R6.21 billion. This excludes municipal rates 
and taxes, electricity and intercompany spend as these do not 
follow a competitive procurement process. The top 20 
suppliers accounted for 61% of the total spend.
•
 The majority – or 91% – of total thir
d-party spend was with 
local suppliers while 9% was spent with foreign suppliers.
•
 The split between operational expenditur
e and capital 
expenditure spend was 51% and 49% respectively.
Although not subject to the Public Finance Management Act 1 
of 1999 and the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework 
Act 5 of 2000 (PPPFA), the SARB adheres to preferential 
procurement principles. It has incorporated specific elements 
of the PPPFA and has developed a three-year B-BBEE 
strategy to enhance spending with eligible suppliers. This 
strategy is currently in its first year of implementation. Using the 
B-BBEE Generic Codes of Good Practice scorecard, the 
SARB achieved 24.73 out a possible 29 points in terms of 
B-BBEE recognised spend.
Foreign spend
2024/25 R0.6 billion
2023/24 R0.4 billion
9%
91%
Local spend
2024/25 R5.6 billion
2023/24 R4.3 billion
Spend: OPEX
Spend: CAPEX
2024/25 R3 billion
2023/24 R2.2 billion
2024/25 R3.2 billion
2023/24 R2.5 billion
51%
49%
Purposeful 
procurement
The SARB’s procurement strategy 
focuses on delivering goods and 
services in a timely manner, while 
ensuring fairness, equity, 
transparency, competitiveness and 
cost-effectiveness.
The Procurement Division is responsible for ensuring 
procurement services align with the SARB Group 
Procurement and Supplier Management Policy and 
procurement strategy. The Procurement Committee (PC) 
approves all transactions above R5 million, while 
transactions above R50 million require approval from the 
GEC. An increase in the authority limits was approved by  
the GEC during the 2024/25 financial year and came into 
effect on 1 April 2025.
The PC, chaired by the COO and comprising 10 senior 
employees, oversees procurement responsibilities.

92 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Purposeful procurement continued
Category of spend
Maximum  
points that 
can be
 
achieved
SARB score 
achieved in  
the past FY
B-BBEE recognised 
spend 5 5
Black-owned
(spend with entities in  
which black people hold 
more than 51% of the 
exercisable voting rights and 
economic interest)
11 11
Black women-owned
(spend with entities in  
which black women hold 
more than 30% of the 
exercisable voting rights and 
economic interest)
4 4
Qualifying small 
enterprise
(spend with entities with  
revenue between R10 million  
and R50 million)
3 1.77
Exempted micro 
enterprise   
(spend with entities with 
revenue <R10 million)
4 0.96
Black designated 
group
(spend with entities in which 
designated groups hold more 
than 51% of the exercisable 
voting rights and economic 
interest)
2 2
Weighted score  
out of 29 points 29 24.73
SARB’s score based on the B-BBEE Generic Codes of Good 
Practice scorecard
69%
Average supplier performance 
score (which means suppliers 
are delivering according to 
expectations)
Number of strategic 
suppliers on the 
SRM Programme
31
Strategic supplier relationship management 
(SRM), alongside performance management, 
is vital for the SARB, given that the majority 
of its spend is with its strategic partners 
based on the criticality of their supply to the 
SARB. This is done to ensure continuous 
service delivery, drive cost efficiencies, 
mitigate risk exposure and present 
innovative solutions to the SARB’s 
challenges. All dealings with suppliers are 
based on ethical and transparent conduct, 
good governance and compliance with 
policies and procedures.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   93 
Our 
subsidiaries
The SARB has four 
subsidiaries: the SABN 
and SA Mint, which 
produce currency; CODI, 
which manages the 
country’s DIF; and the 
CPD, which provides 
investment services.
Subsidiaries of the SARB
The SARB’s Risk Management, Internal Audit, Company Secretariat, Finance 
and Security Services functions extend to the currency-producing subsidiaries, 
ensuring operating efficiencies and consistent management approaches, 
policies and procedures across the SARB Group.
The CPD and CODI operate from the SARB Head Office, using the SARB’s 
accounting systems and infrastructure. The Financial Services Department 
(FSD) of the SARB administers and accounts for the funds under the CPD’s 
control and oversees its investment activities.
Currency-producing
Investment services Deposit insurance
Corporation for 
Public Deposits
Invests call deposits from the public 
sector in deposits, short-term 
money market instruments and 
special Treasury bills. The CPD may 
also accept call deposits from other 
depositors, if approved by the 
Minister of Finance.
All funds invested with the CPD and 
the related interest earned are 
repayable on demand.
Board Chairperson 
Deputy Governor: 
R (Rashad) Cassim
South African Mint 
Company (RF) 
Proprietary Limited 
(SA Mint)
Produces coin and coin-related 
products for South Africa and  
the export market.
Board Chairperson 
SARB Group Executive: Currency 
Management, M (Mogam) Pillay
Managing Director  
L (Liziwe) Mda
Board Chairperson 
SARB Group Executive: Currency 
Management, M (Mogam) Pillay
Managing Director  
T (Takalani) Mafhiri
South African Bank 
Note Company (RF) 
Proprietary Limited 
(SABN)
Produces notes for South Africa.
Corporation for 
Deposit Insurance
Administers the DIF to give 
qualifying bank depositors 
access up to R100 000 of their 
qualifying deposits in the unlikely 
event of their bank being placed 
in resolution.
Board Chairperson 
Deputy Governor:  
M (Mampho) Modise
CEO 
S (Sabihah) Mohamed

94 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
The SARB’s performance   |   Our subsidiaries continued
2024/25 Performance highlights
The SA Mint’s focus will be on 
delivering the circulation coin order 
and optimising its supply chain as 
well as implementing the product 
portfolio strategy for its Collectables 
business. Additionally, the SA Mint 
will continue to focus on the GRC 
framework.
In the year ahead, the SA Mint will 
host the Mint Directors Conference 
2025 and the Coin Awards.
Looking ahead
Circulation coins
Manufactures and supplies 
legal tender coins for 
circulation and transactional 
use in the local economy and 
for international customers.
Collectables
Manufactures and sells high-
quality precious metal products, 
mainly gold, silver and platinum, 
aimed at collectors and gift 
buyers locally and globally.
Prestige Bullion
Manufactures and sells premium precious 
metal products (Krugerrands) in gold, 
silver and platinum, for collectors and gift 
buyers. The SA Mint holds an 80% share 
in Prestige Bullion.
The SA Mint’s business units
Amid fluctuating commodity prices and volatile global economic 
conditions, the Mint reported revenue of R3 291 million, as at  
31 March 2025 compared to R3 225 million in 2023/24. This is 
mainly due to a slowdown in demand for bullion, with sales at 
Prestige Bullion of R1 819 million compared to R1 815 million in 
the previous year.
Other highlights include:
•
 Completed the SARB or
der of 887 million coins a month ahead 
of schedule.
•
 Collectables coin r
evenue was R515 million (compared to  
R439 million in 2023/24). Coin World, the Mint’s retail outlet, 
delivered record revenue of R78 million (2023/24: R75 million)  
for collectable and bullion sales.
•
 Developed a pr
oduct portfolio strategy for Collectables and 
launched the Big 5 Series III elephant and lion, depicting the 
animals in motion.
•
 Commissioned by the Central Bank of Eswatini to pr
oduce its 
50th anniversary commemorative coins.
•
 Implemented the Risk Management and Compliance 
pr
ogramme, fulfilling a key FIC requirement.
•
 Achieved two million hours without any lost-time injury (L
TI), 
maintaining a strong focus on safety.
•
 Received a 75% engagement scor
e in the Deloitte  
Culture Survey.
The South African Mint Company 
As a leading coin producer globally, the SA Mint adheres to 
top-quality standards, ensuring best practices in 
occupational health, safety and environmental management.
Active in the international minting community, the SA Mint is 
a member of the Mint Directors Association and contributes 
to its Sustainability Subcommittee and  
Technical Committee.
The key focus for the 2024/25 financial year has been  
on the delivery of the SARB’s circulation coin order and 
launching a new range of collectables products.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   95 
The South African  
Bank Note Company
The ongoing economic challenges and geopolitical conflicts 
have impacted global supply chains and operational stability. 
This has led to a strategic reassessment of our equipment 
maintenance approaches to ensure reliability and availability. By 
adopting alternative maintenance strategies, we have 
strengthened our resilience and maintained competitive pricing 
in an ever-changing global environment.
At the core of our success is our people. We continuously 
invest in their development through targeted capacity-building 
initiatives such as leadership development programmes and 
structured coaching. These efforts provide our teams with the 
necessary skills and mindset to drive our strategic objectives.
The SABN has retained its international standards accreditation 
for its Quality Management System, Occupational Health and 
Safety Management System, and Environmental Management 
and Business Continuity Management, among other systems 
and processes.
Additionally, the SABN is accredited by the Banknote Ethics 
Initiative Accreditation Council. It has maintained its Level 1 
accreditation, adhering to a Code of Ethical Business Practice 
to combat corruption within the industry.
The SABN aims to continue accelerating operational 
excellence to enhance banknote quality and optimise 
the cost of currency. A key priority remains the 
implementation of our Asset Masterplan, ensuring 
that banknote volume demands are met efficiently 
and reliably.
We remain committed to embedding ESG principles 
into our operations.
Looking ahead
2024/25 Performance highlights
• Pr oduced 802 million banknotes for the SARB.
•
 Ear
nings before interest, taxes, depreciation and 
amortisation (EBITDA) are at R52 million, compared to a 
loss of R122 million the previous year. 
•
 Net pr
ofit before tax amounted to R55 million, compared 
to a loss of R119 million in 2023/24.
•
 Achieved a medical tr
eatment frequency rate of 0.65, 
reinforcing a strong commitment to health, safety and 
environmental management systems and processes.
•
 Implemented inline quality inspection systems for 
banknote numbering to impr
ove quality at the source.

Annual financial statements 2024/25
FINANCIALS
96 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   97 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Introduction
The directors are pleased to present to stakeholders 
this report on the activities and financial results of the 
SARB, including its subsidiaries (Group), for the current 
financial year.
The annual report, issued in terms of the SARB Act and its 
regulations, addresses the performance of the Group and its 
compliance with the relevant statutory information 
requirements.
It is the responsibility of the directors to prepare the Group 
annual financial statements (financial statements) and related 
financial information that present the Group’s state of affairs. 
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance 
with the reporting framework set out in note 1. The financial 
statements include appropriate disclosures and are based 
on accounting policies that have been consistently applied 
and which are supported by reasonable judgements and 
estimates.
These financial statements were prepared on a going 
concern basis, taking cognisance of certain unique aspects 
relating to the SARB’s ability to create, distribute and 
destroy domestic currency; its role as lender of last resort 
and Resolution Authority; its responsibilities in the areas of 
price and financial stability; and its relationship with the SA 
government concerning foreign exchange and gold 
transactions.
The directors have considered the impact of the volatility in 
financial markets due to the implementation of changes in 
interest rates by central banks globally to curb the rise of 
inflation, among other factors. The directors have also 
considered the impact of ongoing geo-political tensions, 
which continue to negatively impact financial markets in 
general. The directors have concluded that the impact of 
the volatility in financial markets has had no effect on the 
going concern of the SARB and its subsidiaries. However, 
these matters will be monitored and included in 
considerations for forward-looking information.
The financial statements were audited by the independent 
external auditors who were given unrestricted access to all 
financial records and related data, including the minutes of 
all the meetings of the Board and its committees as well as 
the minutes of executive management meetings.
The directors are responsible for governance, which is 
monitored on an ongoing basis. The SARB applies the 
principles and guidelines of King IV™ where appropriate and 
where they do not contravene the SARB Act.
Nature of business
The SARB is the central bank of South Africa and is 
regulated in terms of the SARB Act. Its primary objective is 
to protect the value of the currency in the interest of 
balanced and sustainable economic growth. In pursuit of 
price and financial stability, the SARB performs the key 
activities set out in the annual report.
In exceptional circumstances, as part of its central banking 
functions, the SARB may act as a lender of last resort or 
provide assistance of a similar nature to financial institutions 
in difficulty to prevent a loss of confidence spreading 
through the financial system as a whole.
In some cases, confidence can best be sustained if the 
SARB’s support is disclosed only when the conditions giving 
rise to a potentially systemic disturbance have improved. 
Accordingly, although the financial effects of such 
operations will be included in the financial statements in the 
year in which they occur, these financial statements may not 
explicitly identify the existence of such support. However, 
such support will be reported when the need for secrecy or 
confidentiality has ceased.
Subsidiaries
The subsidiaries of the SARB are:
• The South African Mint Company (RF) Proprietary Limited 
(SA Mint) which produces circulation and collectable 
coins, and its subsidiary Prestige Bullion which produces 
bullion coins.
• The South African Bank Note Company (RF) Proprietary 
Limited (SABN) which produces banknotes.
• The Corporation for Public Deposits (CPD) which receives 
and invests deposits from the SA government and public 
entities.
• The Corporation for Deposit Insurance (CODI) which 
provides deposit insurance and carries out its functions to 
support the SARB in fulfilling its objective of, and 
responsibility for, protecting and maintaining financial 
stability.
Information on the SARB’s financial interest in its 
subsidiaries is provided in note 34.
The subsidiaries did not pass any special resolutions that 
are material to the SARB’s affairs in the reporting year.
Associate
African Bank Holdings Limited (ABHL), an associate of the 
SARB, is the holding company of African Bank Limited 
(ABL) and African Insurance Group Limited.
Information on the SARB’s financial interest in its associate 
is provided in note 34.
Achievement of objectives
The annual report covers the SARB’s achievements against 
its strategic objectives.
Directors’ report 
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
98 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Financial results
The SARB’s profit after taxation amounted to R118 billion 
(2023/24: R13 billion). Net investment income increased by 
R6 billion to R33 billion (2023/24: R19 billion increase to 
R27 billion), while operating costs increased by R2 billion to 
R10 billion (2023/24: R1 billion increase to R8 billion).
The SARB received a transfer of R100 billion (2023/24: Rnil) 
from National Treasury, to promote the policy solvency of 
the SARB. 
In March 2025, ABHL implemented an employee share 
scheme which resulted in the SARB’s equity shareholding in 
ABHL being diluted from 50% to 45%. The SARB 
recognised a dilution loss of R311 million in this regard.
The SA Mint (including Prestige Bullion) made a profit after 
taxation of R152 million (2023/24: R271 million). 
SABN made a profit after taxation of R40 million (2023/24: 
R87 million loss).
CODI commenced operations in the current financial year 
and made a profit of R1 billion (2023/24: R1 million loss).
ABHL made a profit after taxation of R71 million (2023/24: 
R154 million), attributable to the Group.
Financial position
The SARB’s total assets increased by R58 billion to 
R1 296 billion (2023/24: R1 238 billion). The total liabilities 
of the SARB decreased by R61 billion to R1 139 billion 
(2023/24: R1 200 billion). The SARB paid R200 billion to 
National Treasury in partial settlement of the GFECRA 
liability. Refer to note 21 for details.
The SARB’s contingency reserve increased by R118 billion 
to R151 billion (2023/24: R33 billion) due to the transfer 
of the current year profit after taxation to the 
contingency reserve.
The SA Mint’s total assets (including Prestige Bullion) 
decreased by R253 million to R2 853 million (2023/24: 
R3 106 million), mainly due to lower inventory. The total 
liabilities of the SA Mint (including Prestige Bullion) 
decreased by R314 million to R1 062 million (2023/24: 
R1 376 million) mainly due to lower trade payables.
The SABN’s total assets increased by R288 million to 
R2 865 million (2023/24: R2 577 million) mainly due to 
higher cash and cash equivalents and inventories. SABN’s 
total liabilities increased by R251 million to R714 million 
(2023/24: R463 million), mainly due to an increase in 
accounts payable.
The CPD’s total assets increased by R7 billion to 
R120 billion (2023/24: R113 billion), largely due to a net 
increase in short- term fixed deposits, offset by lower money 
market investments. The CPD’s total liabilities increased by 
R6 billion to R118 billion (2023/24: R112 billion), largely due 
to an increase in deposits.
CODI’s total assets increased to R20 billion (2023/24: Rnil), 
due to the Deposit Insurance Fund investments. CODI’s 
total liabilities increased to R19 billion, due to liquidity tier 
loans provided by member banks.
Further details on the Group’s financial information for the 
year can be found on page 102.
Dividends
The SARB Act permits the SARB to declare dividends from 
its accumulated profits (reserves). As per the SARB Act, a 
total dividend at the rate of 10% per annum on the paid-up 
share capital of the SARB. The total dividend paid for the 
financial year was R200 000 (2023/24: R200 000).
Directors
The composition of the Board at 31 March 2025 is reported 
in the annual report. At the AGM held on 30 July 2024, the 
terms of office of S (Shamima) Gaibie as a non-executive 
director with knowledge and skills in labour, N B (Norman) 
Mbazima as a non-executive director with knowledge and 
skills in mining, and Y (Yvonne) Muthien as a non-executive 
director with knowledge and skills in commerce and finance, 
expired. The incumbents, being eligible for nomination and 
re-election, were re-elected as the non-executive directors 
for a term extending from 31 July 2024 until the day after 
the AGM in 2027.
The terms of office of L H (Lerato) Molebatsi and K H 
(Kgabo) Badimo as government-appointed non-executive 
directors expired on 31 May 2025.
The terms of office of C B (Charlotte) Buitendag and  
Z (Zoaib) Hoosen, as non-executive directors with 
knowledge and skills in industry; and N (Nicholas) Vink as 
a non-executive director with knowledge and skills in 
agriculture, will expire at the date of the 2025 AGM. By 
that time, both Profs. Buitendag and Vink will have each 
completed three terms of office and will therefore not be 
eligible for re-election. On the other hand, Mr Hoosen 
would have completed his second term of office and is 
eligible for re-election by shareholders for another three-
year term. As at 31 March 2025 and to date, none of the 
directors in office held any direct or indirect shareholding in 
the SARB. Directors’ fees for services rendered during the 
reporting year are disclosed in note 34.6.
Directors’ report continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   99 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Statement by the Secretary of the 
SARB
In my capacity as the Secretary of the SARB, I certify that all 
the returns required to be submitted in terms of the SARB 
Act for the year ended 31 March 2025 have been 
completed and are up to date.
The executive directors and management of the SARB are 
responsible for the controls over and the security of the 
website and specifically for establishing and controlling the 
process for electronically distributing annual reports and 
other financial information to shareholders.
Z (Zoliswa) Copiso
Secretary of the SARB
13 June 2025
Events after reporting date
On 9 May 2025, the SARB signed a subscription agreement 
and a shareholders’ agreement to subscribe for 50% of the 
shares in BankservAfrica. The transaction is still subject to 
conditions precedent, including Competition Commission 
approval.
Secretary of the SARB 
Z (Zoliswa) Copiso
Registered office
Business address:
370 Helen Joseph Street 
Pretoria 0002
Postal address: 
P O Box 427 
Pretoria 0001 
The Board approved the financial statements on 
13 June 2025 signed on its behalf by:
E L (Lesetja) Kganyago  
Governor of the SARB 
N (Norman) Mbazima
Non-executive director
and Chairperson of the Audit Committee
R (Reshoketswe) Ralebepa 
Group Chief Financial Officer 
Z (Zoliswa) Copiso
Secretary of the SARB
Directors’ report continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
100 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
reached a high level of maturity, facilitating regular 
interaction, alignment of assessment methodologies and 
effective, integrated dashboard reporting across the three 
lines of assurance. The Combined Assurance Forum (CAF) 
ensures the ongoing review of the approach, model and 
processes as well as regular discussions, information-
sharing and coordination among the different assurance 
providers. This approach contributes significantly towards 
an effective control environment and supports the integrity 
of information used for internal decision-making by 
management, the Board and its committees. Based on 
reports from the three lines of assurance and the CAF, the 
committee finds the combined assurance approach to be 
adequate, effective and aligned to good practices, ensuring 
the achievement of the objective of effective assurance 
activities across the Group.
Financial statements
After reviewing the SARB Group annual financial statements 
and the associated report from the external auditors, the 
Audit Committee recommended its approval to the Board. 
The Audit Committee is confident in the SARB’s status as a  
going concern.
Internal audit
The Audit Committee reviewed and approved the Internal 
Audit Charter, which outlines the purpose, authority and 
responsibility of the Internal Audit function. The charter was 
updated to reflect the new Global Internal Audit Standards. 
The Audit Committee also approved the internal audit 
strategy,  
the annual internal audit plan, including changes to the plan, 
and the resources required to deliver on the plan. 
Additionally, the committee reviewed the IAD’s quarterly 
reports, including its assessment of the internal control 
environment.
The Audit Committee reviewed the feedback on the internal 
quality assurance and improvement process, which resulted 
in an overall assessment of ‘generally conforms’ with the 
standards of the Institute of Internal Auditors. An 
independent external quality assurance review was 
conducted in May 2022 and the next review is scheduled 
for 2026.
The Audit Committee is confident that the IAD is 
independent and adequately resourced to provide 
assurance on the adequacy and effectiveness of the SARB’s 
internal control environment. The Chief Internal Auditor (CIA) 
reports functionally to the Audit Committee and 
administratively to the Governor.
Introduction
The Audit Committee, a subcommittee of the SARB Board, 
consists entirely of independent non-executive directors, 
including the Chairperson. Its duties are outlined in its terms 
of reference, which are approved by the Board and 
reviewed every three years, or more frequently as required.
Throughout the reporting year, the Audit Committee 
performed its oversight functions independently and in full 
compliance with its terms of reference.
The SARB’s executive management, internal auditors, 
external auditors and other assurance providers attended all 
the Audit Committee meetings in an ex officio capacity. 
Additionally, management and the internal and external 
auditors had independent meetings with the Audit 
Committee as appropriate.
Roles and responsibilities
The Audit Committee supports the Board in its oversight of 
the SARB’s financial reporting processes, risk management 
and internal financial controls. It also monitors the SARB’s 
compliance with laws and regulations. The Audit Committee 
confirms that its members were independent from the SARB 
during the review period and had no other relationships that 
might compromise their duties.
Internal control (including internal 
financial controls)
The SARB’s system of internal financial controls is designed 
to ensure:
• the integrity and reliability of financial information;
• compliance with all applicable laws and regulations;
• the achievement of objectives;
• economy and efficiency of operations; and
• the safeguarding of assets.
The Audit Committee is confident that the internal 
financial controls are well-designed and function effectively, 
providing a solid foundation for creating reliable financial 
reports. This assessment is based on reports provided by 
management, risk management teams, internal auditors 
and external auditors.
The Audit Committee also reviewed and is satisfied with the 
expertise and experience of the Group CFO in preparing the 
annual financial statements. The finance function in the 
SARB has the necessary expertise and adequate resources 
to support the Group CFO.
Combined assurance
The Group has adopted a combined assurance approach in 
line with King IV™, aimed at increasing the effectiveness of 
assurance activities across the three lines of assurance. The 
model has been continuously improved and has now 
Report of the Audit Committee
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   101 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
External audit
The Audit Committee is confident in the independence of 
the SARB’s external auditors. This conclusion was reached 
after considering the independence letters from the external 
auditors, continuously monitoring and approving of non-
audit services as well as a formal process for partner 
rotation and audit firm rotation.
The Audit Committee also reviewed the external auditors’ 
proposed audit scope, approach and fees for the year 
under review.
Non-audit services
The Audit Committee is responsible for approving the SARB 
policy regarding the provision of non-audit services by the 
external auditors. The policy serves as the primary reference 
for the Audit Committee when setting and approving the 
limits for such awards. These limits are set to safeguard the 
external auditors’ independence and ensure there is no 
public perception of a conflict of interest.
The SARB’s FSD is authorised to approve the awarding of 
non-audit services to external auditors and their networks, 
provided they fall within the limits set by the GEC and the 
Audit Committee. Any non-audit services that exceed these 
limits require prior approval by the Audit Committee.
The non-audit fees for the financial year ended 31 March 
2025, as well as those from the previous year, remain well 
within the predetermined limits set by the SARB policy on 
non-audit services provided by the SARB’s external auditors.
Compliance
The Audit Committee is confident that, for the current year, 
the SARB has implemented appropriate processes and 
controls to ensure compliance with all the applicable laws 
and regulations related to financial reporting. This conclusion 
is based on the Audit Committee’s review of reports from 
both internal and external auditors as well as from executive 
management and relevant departments.
Information and technology
The Audit Committee is confident in the SARB’s I&T 
capabilities, affirming that its controls are appropriate to 
support the integrity of financial reporting.
This confidence stems from the Audit Committee’s 
continuous review of assurance reports from the GEC and 
both the internal and external auditors.
The Audit Committee also acknowledges the SARB’s rapidly 
growing technology footprint, facilitated by the ongoing 
large-scale transformation projects and the replacement of 
legacy systems in line with the SARB’s strategic objectives.
Whistle-blowing
Based on the combined submissions from the RMCD and 
IAD to the BREC, the Audit Committee is confident in the 
procedures for handling confidential and anonymous 
complaints related to the integrity and ethics at the SARB. 
These procedures include receiving, evaluating, investigating 
and reporting on such complaints.
N (Norman) Mbazima 
Chairperson of the Audit Committee
Report of the Audit Committee continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
102 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
 d.   as a r esult of transactions a. to c. being accumulated 
in GFECRA for the account of the SA Government, 
the GFECRA account is also not accounted for in 
accordance with the requirements of IFRS 
Accounting Standards.
Disclosure
In the financial statements not all information as required by 
IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures is disclosed.
This relates specifically to:
 a.
  market risk for all financial assets (for
eign and local): 
The sensitivity analysis for each type of market risk to 
which the SARB is exposed at the reporting date 
showing how profit or loss and equity/other 
comprehensive income (OCI) would have been 
affected by changes in the relevant risk variables that 
were reasonably possible at that date;
 b.
  cr
edit risk for foreign financial assets: The credit 
quality per counterparty (issuer) and per country, the 
historical information about the counterparty default 
rates and instruments per counterparty; and
 c.
  cr
edit risk for local financial assets: The credit quality 
per counterparty (issuer) and instrument class, the 
historical information about the counterparty default 
rates and a breakdown of instruments per 
counterparty.
Central banking
The SARB, as the mandated central bank of South Africa, 
will exercise discretion on lender-of-last-resort activities as it 
relates to the management and oversight responsibilities of 
the domestic financial market operation.
Reporting framework
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance 
with the SARB Act and the accounting policies set out  
in note 1.
The SARB Act is not prescriptive regarding the accounting 
framework that the SARB should adopt except for sections  
25 to 28 which deal with the accounting treatment of gold, 
foreign exchange transactions and forward exchange contracts.
These sections are in conflict with the IFRS
® Accounting 
Standards as issued by the International Accounting 
Standards Board. The SARB has chosen to use IFRS 
Accounting Standards, including IFRIC
® Interpretations as a 
guide in deciding on the most appropriate accounting policies 
to adopt and as a model for the presentation and disclosure 
framework followed in its financial statements.
However, the SARB Act takes precedence over IFRS 
Accounting Standards in the areas noted above and as a 
result the recognition, measurement and disclosure criteria as 
set out in IFRS Accounting Standards have not been followed 
in these circumstances. In addition the SARB considers 
certain recognition and measurement principles as well as 
disclosures inappropriate to its functions. The SARB’s 
financial statements therefore disclose less detail than would 
be required under IFRS Accounting Standards. The 
departures from IFRS Accounting Standards as a 
consequence of the above are summarised as follows:
Recognition and measurement
1. Accor ding to the SARB Act: 
 a.
  for
eign exchange gains and losses on foreign-
denominated assets and liabilities, including special 
drawing rights (SDRs), are for the account of the SA 
government and have therefore not been accounted 
for in profit or loss as required by IAS 21: The Effects 
of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates (IAS 21). 
These valuation gains and losses are accumulated in 
GFECRA for the account of the SA government; 
 b.
  gold is valued at the statutory gold price and is 
traded for the account of the SA Gover
nment. All 
gains and losses relating to gold transactions are 
accumulated in GFECRA for the account of the SA 
Government;
 c. 
 gains and losses on forwar
d exchange contracts 
(FECs) are for the account of the SA government and 
have therefore not been accounted for in profit or loss 
as required by IFRS 9: Financial Instruments (IFRS 9). 
 
  These valuation gains and losses ar
e accumulated in 
GFECRA for the account of the SA Government; and
Financial reporting framework
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   103 
Annual financial statements 2024/25

104 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  
continued
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   105 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  
continued
106 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  
continued
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   107 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  
continued
108 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  
continued
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   109 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS’ REPORT TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  
continued
110 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
GROUP SARB
Note
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 2 90 053 61 743 – –
Amounts due by Group companies 34.4 – – 194 777
Accommodation to banks 3 353 451 353 451
Investments 4 425 23 637 – –
Other assets 5 2 356 2 816 1 952 2 597
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 1 235 701 1 179 025 1 235 701 1 179 025
Inventories 7 2 524 2 587 6 5
Forward exchange contract assets 8 78 118 78 118
Loans and advances 9 4 494 7 080 4 494 7 080
Current taxation receivable 24 5 35 – –
South African government bonds 10 34 803 32 007 34 803 32 007
Equity investment in Bank for International 
Settlements 11 7 184 6 605 7 184 6 605
Investments in subsidiaries 34.1 – – 1 012 1 012
Investment in associate 34.3 3 189 3 429 2 795 3 106
Property, plant and equipment 12 7 396 5 297 5 875 3 800
Intangible assets 13 1 322 1 397 1 292 1 367
Total Assets 1 389 883 1 326 227 1 295 739 1 237 950
Liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 15 167 771 169 504 167 771 169 504
Deposits 16 579 638 474 272 462 002 363 947
Amounts due to Group companies 34.4 – – 50 328 28 303
Foreign deposits 17 88 338 101 224 88 338 101 224
Other liabilities 18 3 535 3 732 2 181 1 747
Liquidity tier liability 19 18 779 – – –
Forward exchange contract liabilities 8 6 24 6 24
Current taxation payable 24 1 427 58 1 432 58
Deferred taxation liabilities 14 795 753 631 598
Post-employment benefits 20 2 793 2 685 2 566 2 470
Gold and Foreign Exchange Contingency Reserve
Account 21 363 901 531 989 363 901 531 989
Total Liabilities 1 226 983 1 284 241 1 139 156 1 199 864
Capital and reserves
Share capital 22 2 2 2 2
Accumulated profit 4 561 2 935 – –
Statutory reserve 458 458 458 458
Contingency reserve 152 856 34 258 151 238 33 415
Bank for International Settlements revaluation reserve 11 4 033 3 426 4 033 3 426
Property plant and equipment revaluation reserve 12 144 128 144 128
Post-employment benefit remeasurement reserve 20 765 713 708 657
Non-controlling interest 81 66 – –
Total capital and reserves 162 900 41 986 156 583 38 086
Total liabilities, capital and reserves 1 389 883 1 326 227 1 295 739 1 237 950
Consolidated and separate statements of financial 
position
as at 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   111 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
GROUP SARB
Note
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Interest revenue from amortised cost items 32 9 381 10 697 1 094 1 298
Interest revenue from fair value items 32 13 803 14 674 13 774 14 609
Interest expense 32 (23 253) (18 339) (15 454) (9 372)
Net interest (expense) revenue (69) 7 032 (586) 6 535
Fair value gains 32 33 669 20 164 33 559 19 941
Dividend income 32 & 34.3 145 112 145 112
Operating income 23.1 4 997 3 370 1 326 1 127
Other income 23.1 100 000 – 100 000 –
Total income 138 742 30 678 134 444 27 715
Movement in credit loss allowances 29.2 342 337 – 8
Operating costs 23.2 (11 891) (10 561) (9 658) (8 448)
Share of net profit of associate 34.3 71 154 – –
Dilution loss on investment in associate 34.3 (311) – (311) –
Impairment loss on investment in associate 34.3 – (982) – (982)
Profit before taxation 126 953 19 626 124 475 18 293
Taxation 24 (6 714) (5 372) (6 652) (5 301)
Profit for the year 120 239 14 254 117 823 12 992
Attributable to:
The parent 120 224 14 213 117 823 12 992
Non-controlling interest 34.1 15 41 – –
120 239 14 254 117 823 12 992
Other comprehensive income
Items that will not be reclassified to profit or 
loss:
Net gain on equity investments designated at fair 
value through other comprehensive income 11 774 417 774 417
Revaluation of property, plant and equipment 12 20 – 20 –
Remeasurement of post-employment benefits 20 69 139 70 136
Taxation 14 (190) (128) (190) (127)
Other comprehensive income for the year 
net of taxation 673 428 674 426
Total comprehensive income for the year 120 912 14 682 118 497 13 418
Total comprehensive income attributable to:
The parent 120 897 14 641 118 497 13 418
Non-controlling interest 34.1 15 41 – –
120 912 14 682 118 497 13 418
Consolidated and separate statements of profit or 
loss and other comprehensive income
for the year ended 31 March 2025
112 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
GROUP SARB
Note
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Net cash flows generated from operating 
activities
Net cash flows generated from operations 26 32 665 32 835 22 432 13 648
Interest received 8 708 10 697 1 074 1 298
Interest paid (21 982) (18 339) (15 216) (9 372)
Taxation paid 24 (5 456) (3 700) (5 436) (3 524)
Dividends paid1 25 – – – –
Dividends received 32 & 34.3 145 112 145 112
Net cash flows generated from operating 
activities 14 080 21 605 2 999 2 162
Net cash flows utilised in investing activities
Purchase of property, plant and equipment 12 (2 490) (2 186) (2 337) (2 068)
Proceeds on disposal of property, plant and 
equipment and intangible assets – 235 – 235
Purchase of intangible assets 13 (669) (338) (662) (329)
Net cash flows utilised in investing activities (3 159) (2 288) (2 999) (2 162)
Net cash flows generated from financing 
activities
Interest paid on liquidity tier liability (1 271) – – –
Increase in liquidity tier liability 19 18 929 – – –
Repayment of liquidity tier liability 19 (269) – – –
Net cash flows generated from financing 
activities 17 389 – – –
Total cash and cash equivalents movement  
for the year 28 310 19 317 – –
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning  
of the year 2 61 743 42 426 – –
Total cash and cash equivalents at  
the end of the year 2 90 053 61 743 – –
1 Dividends paid for the 2024/25 financial year amounted to R0.2 million (2024: R0.2 million).  
Consolidated and separate statements  
of cash flows
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   113 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Share 
capital
R mil
PEB
remeasurement 
reserve
R mil
PPE
revaluation
reserve
R mil
Contingency 
reserve
R mil
BIS
 revaluation
 reserve
R mil
Statutory
 reserve
R mil
Accumulated 
profit
R mil
Total
R mil
Non-
 controlling
 interest
R mil
Total
R mil
Group
Balance at 31 March 2023  2  613  128  20 423  3 099  458   2 557   27 280 25 27 305
Profit for the year  –   –   –   –   –   –   14 213  14 213 41 14 254
Other comprehensive income  –   100  –   –   327  –   –   427 – 427
Total comprehensive income 
for the year  –   100  –   –   327  –   14 213  14 640 41 14 681
Transfer to/(from) reserves  –   –   –   13 835  –   –   (13 835)  –  – –
Balance at 31 March 2024  2  713  128  34 258  3 426  458  2 935   41 921 66 41 986
Profit for the year  –   –   –   –   –   –  120 224 120 224 15 120 239
Other comprehensive income  –   52   16   –  607  –   –   675  – 675
Total comprehensive income 
for the year  –  52 16  –   607  –  120 224 120 899 15 120 914
Transfer to/(from) reserves – – – 118 598 – – (118 598) – – –
Dividends paid
1  –   –   –   –   –   –   –   –  – –
Balance at 31 March 2025  2  765  144 152 856  4 033  458 4 561 162 819 81 162 900
Note 22
1 Dividends paid for the 2024/25 financial year amounted to R0.2 million (2024: R0.2 million).
Consolidated statement of changes in equity
for the year ended 31 March 2025
114 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Explanatory notes 
Statutory reserve
The statutory reserve is maintained in terms of section 24 of 
the SARB Act which stipulates that one-tenth of the surplus 
of the SARB after provisions normally provided for by 
bankers (i.e. contingency reserve) and payment of dividends 
has to be credited to the statutory reserve.
Contingency reserve
In terms of section 24 of the SARB Act and section 15 of 
the CPD Act, contingency reserves are maintained to 
provide against risks to which the SARB and the CPD 
respectively are exposed.
Bank for International Settlements 
revaluation reserve
The shares held in the BIS are held as part of the SARB's 
function as a central bank and are thus long-standing in 
nature. Shares are only transferable with the prior consent of 
the BIS. The net fair value gains/losses on the revaluation of 
the BIS shares are recognised in OCI. Changes in value due 
to foreign exchange movements are transferred to the 
GFECRA. Refer to note 11 for more details.
Property, plant and equipment  
revaluation reserve
Gains and losses arising from a change in the fair value of 
artwork included in property, plant and equipment (PPE) are 
recognised in OCI. When these assets are sold, collected or 
otherwise disposed of, the cumulative gain or loss previously 
recognised in OCI is recognised in accumulated profit.
Post-employment benefit  
remeasurement reserve
Actuarial gains and losses relating to the remeasurement of 
the post-employment benefits (PEB) and arising from 
experience adjustments and changes in actuarial 
assumptions are charged or credited to OCI in the period in 
which they arise. These gains and losses are not 
subsequently reclassified to profit or loss.
Transfer to SA government
In terms of section 24 of the SARB Act, nine–tenths of the 
surplus of the SARB after provisions normally provided for 
by bankers (i.e contingency reserve) and payment of 
dividends has to be made to the SA government. For the 
year ended 31 March 2025, no surplus (2024: Rnil) was due 
to the SA government by the SARB.
In terms of section 15 of the CPD Act, the balance of net 
profits after transfers to reserves and payment of dividends 
has to be made to the SA government. For the year ended 
31 March 2025, no profits (2024: Rnil) were due to the SA 
government by the CPD.
Non-controlling interest
The group discloses non-controlling interest as a result of its 
100% owned subsidiary (SA Mint) that owns 80% 
in Prestige Bullion.
Consolidated statement of changes in equity 
continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   115 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Share 
capital
R mil
PEB
remeasurement 
reserve
R mil
PPE
revaluation
reserve
R mil
Contingency 
reserve
R mil
BIS
 revaluation
 reserve
R mil
Statutory
 reserve
R mil
Accumulated 
profit
R mil
Total
R mil
SARB
Balance at 31 March 2023 2 558 128 20 423 3 099 458 – 24 668
Profit for the year – – – – – – 12 992 12 992
Other comprehensive income – 99 – – 327 – – 426
Total comprehensive income  
for the year – 99 – – 327 – 12 992 13 418
Transfer to/(from) reserves – – – 12 992 – – (12 992) –
Dividends paid1 – – – – – – – –
Balance at 31 March 2024 2 657 128 33 415 3 426 458 – 38 086
Profit for the year – – – – – – 117 823 117 823
Other comprehensive income – 51 16 – 607 – – 674
Total comprehensive income  
for the year – 51 16 – 607 – 117 823 118 497
Transfer to/(from) reserves – – – 117 823 – – (117 823) –
Dividends paid
1 – – – – – – – –
Balance at 31 March 2025 2 708 144 151 238 4 033 458 – 156 583
Note 22
1 Dividends paid for the 2024/25 financial year amounted to R0.2 million (2024: R0.2 million).
Separate statement of changes in equity
for the year ended 31 March 2025
116 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Explanatory notes 
Statutory reserve
The statutory reserve is maintained in terms of section 24 of 
the SARB Act which stipulates that one-tenth of the surplus 
of the SARB after provisions normally provided for by 
bankers (i.e. contingency reserve) and payment of dividends 
has to be credited to the statutory reserve.
Contingency reserve
In terms of section 24 of the SARB Act, contingency 
reserves are maintained to provide against risks to which 
the SARB is exposed.
Bank for International Settlements 
revaluation reserve
The shares held in the BIS are held as part of the SARB’s 
function as a central bank and are thus long-standing in 
nature. Shares are only transferable with the prior consent of 
the BIS. The net fair value gains/losses on the revaluation of 
the BIS shares are recognised in OCI. Changes in value due 
to foreign exchange movements are transferred to the 
GFECRA. Refer to note 11 for more details.
Property, plant and equipment  
revaluation reserve
Gains and losses arising from a change in fair value of 
artwork included in PPE are recognised in OCI. When these 
assets are sold, collected or otherwise disposed of, the 
cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in OCI is 
recognised in accumulated profit.
Post-employment benefit  
remeasurement reserve
Actuarial gains and losses relating to the remeasurement of 
the PEB and arising from experience adjustments and 
changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to 
OCI in the period in which they arise. These gains and 
losses are not subsequently reclassified to profit or loss.
Transfer to SA government
In terms of section 24 of the SARB Act, nine-tenths of the 
surplus of the SARB after provisions normally provided for 
by bankers (i.e. contingency reserve) and payment of 
dividends has to be made to the SA government. For the 
year ended 31 March 2025, no profits (2024: Rnil) were due 
to the SA government by the SARB.
Separate statement of changes in equity continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   117 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
The accounting policies have been applied consistently to 
all years presented.
1.2 New accounting pr onouncements
1.2.1  New accounting pr onouncements 
effective in the current financial year
Amendments to IAS 1: Classification of liabilities as 
current or non-current
The amendments clarify the requirements to classify a liability 
as current or non-current. If an entity has the right at the end 
of the reporting period, to defer settlement of a liability for at 
least 12 months after the reporting period, then the liability is 
classified as non-current. If this right is subject to conditions 
imposed on the entity, then the right only exists if, at the end 
of the reporting period the entity has complied with those 
conditions. In addition, the classification is not affected by 
the likelihood that the entity will exercise its right to defer 
settlement. Therefore, if the right exists, the liability is 
classified as non-current even if management intends or 
expects to settle the liability within 12 months of the 
reporting period. Additional disclosures would be required in 
such circumstances. The effective date of the amendments 
is for financial years commencing on or after 1 January 
2024. The amendments do not have a material impact on 
the Group’s financial statements.
Amendments to IAS 1: Non-current liabilities with 
covenants
The amendments improve the information an entity provides 
when its right to defer settlement of a liability for at least 
12 months is subject to compliance with covenants. The 
amendments also provide guidance on when to classify 
liabilities arising from covenants as current or non-current. 
Additional disclosures will be required in the notes to the 
annual financial statements if an entity classifies liabilities 
arising from covenants as non-current. The effective date of 
the amendments is for financial years commencing on or 
after 1 January 2024. The amendments do not have a 
material impact on the Group’s financial statements.
Amendments to IFRS 16: Lease liability in a sale  
and leaseback
The amendments require that a seller-lessee in a sale and 
leaseback transaction, shall determine ‘lease payments’ or 
‘revised lease payments’ in a way that the seller-lessee would 
not recognise any amount of the gain or loss that relates to 
the right of use retained by the seller-lessee. The effective date 
of the amendments is for financial years commencing on or 
after 1 January 2024. The amendments do not have a 
material impact on the Group’s financial statements.
1. Accounting policies
1.1 Basis of pr eparation
The material accounting policies applied in the preparation of 
these financial statements are set out below. These accounting 
policies should be read together with the financial reporting 
framework on page 102.
These financial statements have been prepared on a going 
concern basis, in accordance with the SARB Act and the 
accounting policies set out in this note. The directors have 
considered the impact of the volatility in financial markets, 
mainly as a result of interest rate hikes by central banks 
globally in an attempt to curb the steep rise in inflation, among 
other factors.
The directors have also considered the impact of the ongoing 
geo-political tensions. Although the Group has no direct 
exposure to the affected countries, the conflict continues to 
negatively impact financial markets in general. The directors 
have concluded that the impact of the volatility in financial 
markets has no material effect on the going concern of the 
SARB and its subsidiaries. These matters will, however, be 
monitored and included in the considerations for forward-
looking information. The application of the going concern 
assumption is therefore deemed to be appropriate.
These financial statements have been prepared on the 
historical cost basis, except where the fair value basis is 
considered more appropriate.
These financial statements comprise the consolidated and 
separate statements of financial position as at 31 March 2025, 
consolidated and separate statements of profit or loss and 
other comprehensive income, consolidated and separate 
statements of changes in equity and consolidated and 
separate statements of cash flows for the year ended 
31 March 2025, as well as the notes, comprising a summary 
of material accounting policies and other explanatory notes.
In accordance with section 55 of the FSR Act, separate 
financial accounts in relation to the PA are required. The PA 
annual financial accounts are included on page 203.
The Group’s functional and presentation currency is the South 
African rand and all amounts are rounded to the nearest 
million, unless otherwise stated.
The preparation of the financial statements requires the use of 
certain key accounting estimates. It also requires management 
to exercise judgement in the process of applying the 
accounting policies of the Group. The areas with a higher 
degree of judgement or complexity, or areas where 
assumptions and estimates are significant to the financial 
statements, are disclosed in note 1.22 and the relevant notes.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements
for the year ended 31 March 2025
118 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.2  New accounting pr onouncements 
continued
1.2.1    New accounting pronouncements 
ef
fective in the current financial year 
continued
Amendments to IAS 7 and IFRS 7: Disclosures: 
Supplier Finance Arrangements
The amendments apply to circumstances where supplier 
finance arrangements exist. These are arrangements where 
finance providers pay the suppliers of the entity, thus 
providing the entity with extended payment terms or the 
suppliers with early payment terms. The entity then pays the 
finance providers based on their specific terms and 
conditions. The amendments require the disclosure of 
information about supplier finance arrangements that enable 
users of financial statements to assess the effects of those 
arrangements on the entity’s liabilities and cash flows as well 
as on the entity’s exposure to liquidity risk. The effective 
date of the amendments is for financial years commencing 
on or after 1 January 2024. The amendments do not have a 
material impact on the Group’s financial statements.
IFRS S1: General Requirements for Disclosure of 
Sustainability-related Financial Information and 
IFRS S2: Climate-related disclosures
IFRS S1 and IFRS S2 are the inaugural standards issued by 
the International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB). IFRS 
S1 provides a set of disclosure requirements designed to 
enable companies to communicate to investors about the 
sustainability-related risks and opportunities they face over 
the short, medium and long term while IFRS S2 sets out 
specific climate-related disclosures and is designed to be 
used with IFRS S1. The effective date of these Sustainability 
Disclosure Standards is for financial years commencing on 
or after 1 January 2024 with the adoption thereof currently 
not being mandatory in South Africa. The Group is currently 
developing its broader sustainability strategy and will 
consider adopting these voluntary standards in future 
financial years, when the strategy has been finalised.
1.2.2   New accounting pr onouncements 
issued but not yet effective
Several new IFRS Accounting Standards and amendments 
are effective for financial years commencing on or after 
1 January 2025 and have not been early adopted in 
preparing these financial statements. The Group will adopt 
these amendments, if applicable, in the relevant financial 
year in which they become effective.
These are as follows:
Amendments to IAS 21: Lack of exchangeability
The amendments apply to currencies that are not 
exchangeable. The definition of exchangeable is provided as 
being when an entity is able to obtain the other currency 
within a time frame that allows for a normal administrative 
delay and through a market or exchange mechanism in 
which an exchange transaction would create enforceable 
rights and obligations. The amendments require an entity to 
estimate the spot exchange rate at measurement date when 
a currency is not exchangeable into another currency. 
Additional disclosures are also required to enable users of 
financial statements to understand the impact of the 
non-exchangeability on financial performance, financial 
position and cash flow. The effective date of the 
amendments is for financial years commencing on or after  
1 January 2025. It is unlikely that the amendments will have 
a material impact on the Group's financial statements. 
Amendments to IFRS 9 and IFRS 7: Classification 
and Measurement of Financial Instruments
The amendments clarify that financial assets and financial 
liabilities are recognised and derecognised at settlement 
date except for regular way purchases or sales of financial 
assets and financial liabilities meeting the specified 
conditions. The new exception permits companies to elect 
to derecognise certain financial liabilities settled via 
electronic payments systems earlier than the settlement 
date. The amendments also provide guidelines to assess 
contractual cash flow characteristics of financial assets 
for the year ended 31 March 2025, which apply to all 
contingent cash flows including those arising from 
ESG-linked features. Additionally, these amendments 
introduce additional disclosure requirements with respect to 
investments in equity instruments designated at fair value 
through other comprehensive income and financial 
instruments with contingent features. The effective date of 
these amendments is for financial years commencing on or 
after 1 January 2026. It is unlikely that the amendments will 
have a material impact on the Group’s financial statements.
Amendments to IFRS 9 and IFRS 7: Contracts 
Referencing Nature-dependent Electricity
These amendments address the application of ‘own use’ 
and hedge accounting requirements for Contracts 
Referencing Nature-dependent Electricity, often referred to 
as Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs), which meet 
specified criteria. If a PPA qualifies for the ‘own use’ 
exemption it is accounted for as an executory contract 
rather than as a derivative. In contrast, if a PPA does not 
qualify for the ‘own use’ exemption it is accounted for as a 
derivative to which hedge accounting considerations may 
apply. The amendments apply to contracts that reference 
electricity generated from nature-dependent sources and for 
which cash flows vary based on the amount of electricity 
generated by a reference production facility.  
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   119 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
IFRS Accounting Standard. A subsidiary is eligible to apply 
IFRS 19 if it does not have public accountability and its 
parent company produces consolidated financial statements 
available for public use that comply with IFRS Accounting 
Standards. Entities that elect to apply IFRS 19 are, however, 
still required to apply the recognition measurement and 
presentation requirements of an applicable IFRS Accounting 
Standard. The effective date of this IFRS Accounting 
Standard is for financial years commencing on or after 
1 January 2027. It is unlikely that IFRS 19 will be adopted 
by the subsidiaries within the Group; however, the adoption 
is at the discretion of the relevant subsidiary Boards. For 
consolidation, all subsidiaries will still be required to provide 
the full IFRS disclosures. 
1.3 Gr oup accounting
1.3.1  Subsidiaries
Subsidiaries are all entities over which the SARB has 
control. The SARB controls an entity when the SARB is 
exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its 
involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those 
returns through its power to direct the relevant activities of 
the entity. Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on 
which control is transferred to the SARB.
In the separate financial statements of the SARB, 
investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less 
accumulated impairment losses. Where appropriate, the 
cost includes loans to subsidiaries with no repayment terms 
where these are considered part of the investment in 
subsidiaries. 
Intercompany transactions, balances and unrealised gains 
on transactions between the Group companies are 
eliminated on consolidation.
1.3.2  Investment in associate
An associate is an entity over which the Group has 
significant influence without control or joint control. This is 
generally the case where the Group holds between 20% 
and 50% of the voting rights.
The Group initially recognises its investment in associate at 
cost and subsequently accounts for its share of the post- 
acquisition profits or losses of the associate in profit or loss 
and the Group’s share of movements in OCI of the 
associate, in OCI.
Dividends received or receivable from an associate are 
recognised as a reduction in the carrying amount of the 
investment. In the separate financial statements of the 
SARB the investment in associate is accounted for at cost 
less accumulated impairment losses where appropriate.
1. Accounting policies continued
1.2  New accounting pr onouncements 
continued
1.2.2   New accounting pr onouncements 
issued but not yet effective continued
New disclosures have also been introduced. The effective 
date of these amendments is for financial years 
commencing on or after 1 January 2026. It is unlikely that 
the amendments will have a material impact on the Group’s 
financial statements.
Annual improvements to IFRS Accounting Standards: 
Volume 11
Annual improvements are limited to changes that either 
clarify wording in an IFRS Accounting Standard or correct 
relatively minor unintended consequences, oversights or 
conflicts between the requirements in the IFRS Accounting 
Standards. The effective date of these annual improvements 
is for financial years commencing on or after 1 January 
2026 and have been made to IFRS 1, IFRS 7, IFRS 9, 
IFRS 10 and IAS 7. It is unlikely that the improvements will 
have a material impact on the Group’s financial statements.
IFRS 18: Presentation and Disclosures in Financial 
Statements
IFRS 18 is the new IFRS Accounting Standard issued with 
the objective of providing investors with more transparent 
and comparable information about entities’ financial 
performance. This new IFRS Accounting Standard replaces 
IAS 1: Presentation of Financial Statements (IAS 1) with only 
a few key new concepts being introduced, namely:
• requirements relating to the structure of the statement of 
profit or loss including the introduction of required new 
subtotals in the statement of profit or loss;
• required disclosures in the financial statements for certain 
profit or loss performance measures that are reported 
outside of the entity’s financial statements (Management-
defined Performance Measures (MPM)); and
• enhanced principles on aggregation and disaggregation 
which apply to the primary financial statements and notes 
in general.
The effective date of this IFRS Accounting Standard is for 
financial years commencing on or after 1 January 2027. The 
impact of IFRS 18 on the Group’s financial statements is still 
being assessed. 
IFRS 19: Subsidiaries without public accountability: 
Disclosures
IFRS 19 is a voluntary IFRS Accounting Standard that 
enables an eligible subsidiary to provide reduced disclosures 
compared to the disclosure requirements of an applicable 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
120 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Financial assets, excluding instruments measured in terms of 
the SARB Act, are classified into measurement categories as 
follows:
• financial assets that are held for the collection of 
contractual cash flows where those cash flows represent 
SPPI are measured at amortised cost;
• financial assets that are held for trading or to realise fair 
value changes prior to contractual maturity are measured 
at FVPL; and
• financial assets that are held for both the collection of 
contractual cash flows and for sale are measured at 
FVOCI.
Amortised cost
Assets that are held for collection of contractual cash flows 
where those cash flows represent SPPI and that are not 
specifically excluded in terms of sections 25 to 28 of the 
SARB Act or designated at FVPL are measured at 
amortised cost. Financial assets held at amortised cost 
include:
• cash and cash equivalents;
• accommodation to banks;
• investments;
• loans and advances; and
• other financial assets.
 Fair value through other comprehensive income
Financial assets that are held for collection of contractual 
cash flows and for selling the assets where the assets’ cash 
flows represents SPPI and that are not specifically excluded 
in terms of sections 25 to 28 of the SARB Act or designated 
at FVPL are measured at FVOCI.
If an equity instrument is held for purposes other than to 
generate investment returns the Group can make an 
irrevocable election at initial recognition to measure it at 
FVOCI. The Group’s policy is to designate equity 
instruments as FVOCI when those instruments are held for 
purposes other than to generate investment returns.
The BIS shares are held as part of the SARB’s function as a 
central bank and not to generate investment returns. In 
accordance with the Group’s policy, these shares have been 
designated at FVOCI. Refer to note 11 for further disclosure.
Fair value through profit or loss
Derivatives assets that do not meet the criteria for amortised 
cost or FVOCI and that are not specifically excluded in 
terms of sections 25 to 28 of the SARB Act are measured 
at FVPL. Assets can be designated at FVPL at initial 
recognition if doing so eliminates or significantly reduces a 
measurement or recognition inconsistency.
1. Accounting policies continued
1.4 Financial instruments
1.4.1 Financial assets 
Classification
The Group classifies its financial assets into the following 
measurement categories:
• amortised cost;
• fair value through other comprehensive income (FVOCI);
• fair value through profit or loss (FVPL); and
• instruments measured in terms of the SARB Act.
The Group determines the classification of financial assets 
based on both the Group’s business model for managing the 
financial assets and the contractual cash flow characteristics 
of the financial asset.
For debt instruments the business model test and cash flow 
characteristics of solely payments of principal and interest 
(SPPI) test are applied by the Group in determining the 
category which best applies to the financial instruments that it 
holds and/or trades. Under the business model test the Group 
determines the objective for which it holds the financial 
instrument:
• holding the financial asset to collect the contractual cash 
flows;
• selling the instrument prior to its contractual maturity to 
realise its fair value changes; or
• holding for collection of contractual cash flows and for 
selling the assets.
Factors considered by the Group in determining the business 
model of a group of assets include past experience on how 
the cash flows for these assets are collected, how the asset’s 
performance is evaluated and reported to key management 
personnel, how risks are assessed and managed and how 
managers are compensated. The business model test is 
performed before the SPPI test.
Under the SPPI test the Group determines whether the 
collection of contractual cash flows represent SPPI on 
specified dates. In making this assessment the Group 
considers whether the contractual cash flows are consistent 
with a basic lending arrangement (i.e. interest includes only 
consideration for time value of money, credit risk, other basic 
lending risks and a profit margin that is consistent with a basic 
lending arrangement). Financial assets with embedded 
derivatives are considered in their entirety when determining 
whether their cash flows are SPPI.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   121 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.4 Financial instruments continued 
1.4.1 Financial assets continued 
Financial assets held at mandatory FVPL include:
• foreign exchange reserves; and
• SA government bonds.
The SARB seeks to minimise the effects of currency and 
interest rate risks by using such instruments to economically 
hedge the related risk exposures. The SARB does not enter 
into or trade financial instruments for proprietary trading 
purposes. Refer to note 6 for further disclosure.
Instruments measured in terms of the SARB Act
Sections 25 to 28 of the SARB Act prescribe the accounting 
treatment for specific financial assets which takes precedent 
over IFRS Accounting Standards. The accounting treatment 
prescribed by the SARB Act for these specific financial 
assets is not in line with the requirements of IFRS 9 
therefore these instruments are not classified in accordance 
with IFRS 9 for reporting purposes. The financial reporting 
framework of the SARB specifically refers to this deviation 
from IFRS Accounting Standards.
The following assets are governed by sections 25 to 28 of 
the SARB Act and thus not classified in terms of IFRS 9:
• gold;
• special Drawing Rights (SDR) reserves; and
• FEC assets.
FECs are used for monetary policy operations of the SARB 
and exposures for both assets and liabilities are matched 
economically. The Group has elected to not apply hedge 
accounting per IFRS 9. Refer to note 8 for further 
disclosure.
Initial recognition
Financial assets are recognised when the Group becomes 
party to the contractual provisions of the instrument. Regular 
way purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised on 
trade-date, the date on which the Group commits to purchase 
or sell the asset. From this date any gains or losses arising 
from changes in the fair value of the assets and liabilities are 
recognised.
Financial assets are initially recognised at fair value plus 
transaction costs, except those carried at FVPL. Transaction 
costs of financial assets carried at FVPL are expensed in 
profit or loss. After initial recognition, an expected credit loss 
(ECL) allowance is recognised for financial assets measured 
at amortised cost as described in note 29.2.2.
The best evidence of fair value on initial recognition is the 
transaction price, unless fair value is evidenced by 
comparison with other observable current market 
transactions in the same instrument or based on discounted 
cash flow models and option-pricing valuation techniques 
whose variables include data from observable markets.
When the fair value of financial assets differs from the 
transaction price on initial recognition the Group recognises 
the difference as follows:
• When the fair value is evidenced by a quoted price in an 
active market for an identical asset (i.e. a Level 1 input) or 
based on a valuation technique that uses only data from 
observable markets, the difference is recognised as a gain 
or loss.
• In all other cases the difference is deferred and the timing 
of recognition of the deferred day one profit or loss is 
determined individually. It is either amortised over the life 
of the instrument deferred until the instrument’s fair value 
can be determined using market observable inputs, or 
realised through settlement.
Subsequent measurement 
Equity instruments
All equity investments are valued at fair value with value 
changes being recognised in profit or loss except where the 
Group has elected to present the fair value changes in OCI.
Debt instruments
Amortised cost
The carrying amount of these assets is adjusted by an ECL 
allowance recognised and measured as described in note 
29.2.2. Amortised cost is calculated using the effective 
interest method that discounts the estimated future cash 
payments or receipts through the expected life of the financial 
instrument to the net carrying amount of the financial asset. 
Interest income using the effective interest method from these 
financial assets is included in profit or loss.
Fair value through profit or loss
A fair value gain or loss on a debt instrument subsequently 
measured at FVPL is recognised in profit or loss. Interest 
income using the effective interest method from these 
financial assets is included in profit or loss.
Fair value through other comprehensive income
Fair value movements in the carrying amount are recognised 
in OCI, except for the recognition of impairment losses or 
reversals and interest revenue on the instrument’s amortised 
cost which are recognised in profit or loss and changes in 
fair value due to foreign exchange movements as explained 
in note 1.6. When the financial asset is derecognised the 
cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in OCI is 
reclassified from equity to profit or loss.
Instruments measured in terms of the SARB Act
In terms of sections 25 to 28 of the SARB Act all gains and 
losses on gold held by the SARB and foreign exchange 
gains or losses of the SARB (as explained in note 1.6) 
insofar as they arise from changes in the value of the rand 
compared to other currencies are for the account of the SA 
government. Therefore all these gains or losses are 
transferred to the GFECRA.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
122 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.4 Financial instruments continued
1.4.1 Financial assets continued
Subsequent measurement continued
Impairment of financial assets
The Group assesses on a forward-looking basis the ECL 
associated with its debt instruments carried at amortised 
cost, debt instruments carried at FVOCI and the exposure 
arising from loan commitments. The Group recognises a 
loss allowance for such losses at each reporting date. No 
loss allowance is recognised on equity instruments.
The measurement of ECL reflects:
• an unbiased and probability-weighted amount that is 
determined by evaluating a range of possible outcomes;
• the time value of money; and
• reasonable and supportable information that is available 
without undue cost or effort at the reporting date about 
past events, current conditions and forecasts of future 
economic conditions.
ECL measurement 
IFRS 9 outlines a ‘three-stage’ model for impairment based 
on changes in credit quality since initial recognition. The 
Group applies the same model for all financial assets and is 
summarised below:
• A financial instrument that has not experienced a 
significant increase in credit risk (SICR) since initial 
recognition and is not credit-impaired is classified in 
‘stage 1’ and has its credit risk continuously monitored by 
the Group.
• If a significant increase in credit risk since initial 
recognition is evident, the financial instrument is moved to 
‘stage 2’ but is not yet deemed to be credit impaired. 
Please refer to note 29.2.2.1 for a description of how the 
Group determines when an SICR has occurred.
• If the financial instrument is credit-impaired the financial 
instrument is then moved to ‘stage 3’.
• Financial instruments in stage 1 have their ECL measured 
at an amount equal to the portion of lifetime ECL that 
result from default events possible within the next 12 
months. Financial instruments in stages 2 or 3 have their 
ECL measured on a lifetime basis.
• Purchased or originated credit-impaired financial assets 
are those financial assets that are credit-impaired on 
initial recognition. Their ECL is always measured on a 
lifetime basis (stage 3).
The Group uses the following key inputs in its model for 
measuring ECL:
• probability of default (PD);
• loss given default (LGD); and
• exposure at default (EAD).
Please refer to note 29.2.2.3 for a description of inputs, 
assumptions and estimation techniques used in measuring  
the ECL.
• A pervasive concept in measuring ECL in accordance 
with IFRS 9 is that it should consider forward-looking 
information. Note 29.2.2.4 includes an explanation of how 
the Group has incorporated this in its ECL models.
The ECL assessment for the guarantee provided to the 
commercial banks under the loan guarantee scheme (LGS), 
bounce back scheme (BBS), energy bounce back scheme 
(EBBS) as well as the guarantee provided to member banks 
for liquidity tier contributions made to CODI, are summarised 
below:
• The ECL allowances calculated by the commercial banks 
for the portfolio of borrowings under the LGS and BBS 
are obtained and reviewed by the Group. Similar to the 
Group the commercial banks follow a ‘three-stage’ model 
for impairment based on changes in the credit quality 
since initial recognition and use the same key inputs in 
their models for measuring ECL.
• The LGS ECL allowance is reduced by the guarantee fee 
premium which serves as the first and second loss buffer 
under the waterfall for recovery of losses and, thereafter, 
by a 6% borrowers risk portion (third loss buffer) which is 
borne by the commercial banks. The LGS ECL allowance 
that remains after taking into account the first to third loss 
buffers will be recognised as an ECL in terms of the 
financial guarantee. The SARB’s obligations under the 
LGS are covered by a full back-to-back guarantee from 
the SA government.
• The BBS and EBBS ECL allowances are limited to the 
maximum amount guaranteed by the SARB, which is 
20.5% of the capital amount advanced to commercial 
banks. The SARB’s obligations under these schemes are 
covered by a full back–to–back guarantee from the SA 
government.
• The ECL allowance for the SARB guarantee to member 
banks for their liquidity tier contributions to CODI is 
calculated with reference to CODI's PD.
Write-off policy
• The Group writes off financial assets when it has 
exhausted all practical recovery efforts and has 
concluded that there is no reasonable expectation of 
recovery. Indicators thereof include ceasing enforcement 
activities or where the collateral value indicates that there 
is no reasonable expectation of recovery.
• Financial assets that are written off could still be subject 
to enforcement activities in order to comply with the 
Group’s procedures for recovery of amounts due.
• The key judgements and assumptions adopted by the 
Group in addressing the requirements of the standard are 
discussed in note 29.2.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   123 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.4 Financial instruments continued
1.4.1 Financial assets continued
Subsequent measurement continued
Derecognition of financial assets
Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive 
cash flows from the assets have expired or where the Group 
has transferred substantially all risks and rewards of 
ownership.
Collateral furnished by the Group under standard 
repurchase agreements and securities lending and 
borrowing transactions is not derecognised because the 
Group retains substantially all the risks and rewards on the 
basis of the predetermined repurchase price and the criteria 
for derecognition are therefore not met.
1.4.2 Financial liabilities
Classification
The Group classifies financial liabilities into the following 
measurement categories:
• amortised cost;
• FVPL; and
• instruments measured in terms of the SARB Act.
The Group classifies a financial instrument that it issues as a 
financial liability in accordance with the substance of the 
contractual agreement. Management determines the 
classification of financial liabilities at initial recognition. Due to 
the SARB’s mandate as a central bank and ‘lender of last 
resort’ movements in financial liabilities are classified as 
operating activities in the statement of cash flows.
Financial liabilities at amortised cost
All financial liabilities are measured at amortised cost except 
for liabilities specifically excluded in terms of sections 25 to 
28 of the SARB Act and financial liabilities measured at 
FVPL including derivatives.
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost include:
• notes and coin in circulation;
• deposits; 
• liquidity tier liability; and
• other financial liabilities.
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
Financial liabilities that are managed and whose 
performance is evaluated on a fair value basis and financial 
liabilities so designated are measured at FVPL.
Financial liabilities held at FVPL include:
• foreign deposits.
Instruments measured in terms of the SARB Act
Sections 25 to 28 of the SARB Act prescribe the accounting 
treatment for specific financial liabilities which takes precedent 
over IFRS. The accounting treatment prescribed by the SARB 
Act for these specific financial liabilities is not in line with the 
requirements of IFRS 9, therefore these instruments are not 
classified in accordance with IFRS 9 for reporting purposes. 
The financial reporting framework of the SARB specifically 
refers to this deviation from IFRS.
The following liabilities are governed in terms of sections 25 to 
28 of the SARB Act and thus not classified in terms of IFRS 9:
• FEC liabilities; and
• the GFECRA.
Initial recognition
The Group recognises financial liabilities when it becomes a 
party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial liabilities are initially recognised at fair value, which is 
generally their issue proceeds net of transaction costs 
incurred. The best evidence of fair value on initial recognition is 
the transaction price, unless the fair value is evidenced by 
comparison with other observable current market transactions 
in the same instrument or based on discounted cash flow 
models and option-pricing valuation techniques whose 
variables include only data from observable markets.
Subsequent measurement 
Amortised cost
Amortised cost is calculated using the effective interest 
method that discounts the estimated future cash payments or 
receipts through the expected life of the financial instrument to 
the net carrying amount of the financial liability.
Instruments measured in terms of the SARB Act
In terms of sections 25 to 28 of the SARB Act all gains and 
losses on gold held by the SARB (as explained in note 1.9) and 
foreign exchange profits or losses of the SARB insofar as they 
arise from changes in the value of the rand compared to other 
currencies are for the account of the SA government. Therefore, 
all these gains or losses are transferred to the GFECRA.
Fair value through profit or loss
Subsequent to initial recognition financial liabilities are 
measured at fair value. All related realised and unrealised gains 
or losses arising from changes in fair value, excluding changes 
in fair value due to foreign exchange movements as explained 
in note 1.6, are recognised in profit or loss.
Derecognition of financial liabilities
The Group derecognises financial liabilities when and only 
when the Group’s obligations are discharged, cancelled, expire 
or are substantially modified. The difference between the 
carrying amount of the financial liability derecognised and the 
consideration paid and payable is recognised in profit or loss.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
124 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.4 Financial instruments continued
Modifications 
When the contractual cash flows of a financial instrument 
are renegotiated or otherwise modified and the renegotiation 
or modification does not result in the derecognition of that 
financial instrument, the gross carrying amount is 
recalculated as the present value of the renegotiated or 
modified contractual cash flows that are discounted at the 
financial instrument’s original effective interest rate (or 
credit-adjusted effective interest rate for purchased or 
originated credit-impaired financial assets). A modification 
gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss for the change in 
the gross carrying amount. Any costs or fees incurred adjust 
the carrying amount of the modified financial instrument and 
are amortised over the remaining term of the modified 
financial instrument.
1.4.3  Of fsetting of financial instruments
Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net 
amount is reported in the consolidated and separate 
statements of financial position where there is a current 
legally enforceable right to set off the recognised amounts 
and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or to realise 
the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
1.4.4  Unr ecognised financial assets and 
liabilities
Guarantees
Guarantees represent contracts where the Group 
undertakes to make or receive specified payments to or 
from a counterparty should a counterparty or the SARB 
suffer loss. This amount represents the maximum exposure 
not recognised in the statement of financial position.
Loan commitments
Loan commitments represent firm commitments by the 
Group to provide credit. This amount represents the 
maximum exposure not recognised in the statement of 
financial position.  Refer to note 33.
1.5 Fair value
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset 
or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction in the 
principal (or most advantageous) market at the 
measurement date under current market conditions (i.e. an 
exit price) regardless of whether that price is directly 
observable or estimated using another valuation technique.
A fair value measurement of a non-financial asset takes into 
account a market participant’s ability to generate economic 
benefits by using the asset in its highest and best use or by 
selling it to another market participant that would use the 
asset in its highest and best use.
Fair values are determined according to the fair value hierarchy 
based on the requirements in IFRS 13: Fair Value 
Measurement (IFRS 13). Refer to note 31 for further details.
1.5.1 Derivatives
A derivative is a financial instrument whose value changes in 
response to an underlying variable that requires little or no 
initial investment and is settled at a future date. Fair values are 
obtained from quoted market prices (excluding transaction 
costs), dealer price quotations, discounted cash flow models 
and option-pricing models which consider current market and 
contractual prices for the underlying instruments as well as the 
time value of money.
1.5.2  For eign marketable money market 
investments
The fair value of foreign marketable money market investments 
is based on quoted bid rates excluding transaction costs.
1.5.3  Local and for eign portfolio investments 
including securities lending portfolio 
investments
The fair values of portfolio investments are valued using the 
quoted market values.
Where these instruments are bank deposits they are valued at 
nominal values plus accrued interest based on market rates. 
These values approximate fair values.
1.5.4 SA gover nment bonds
Listed bonds are valued using quoted fair values at year-end 
as supplied by the JSE Limited.
1.5.5 BIS shar es
The SARB’s investment in the BIS is valued at the net asset 
value of the BIS with a haircut of 30% applied. The net asset 
value of the shares is based on XDRs. XDRs are the currency 
in which SDRs are valued. The value of the XDR is calculated 
on the basis of a currency basket comprising the US dollar, 
euro, Chinese yuan, Japanese yen and Pound sterling. The 
currency weights are adjusted each year by the IMF in 
accordance with changes in bilateral foreign exchange rates. 
This adjustment is not subject to sensitivity. Changes in value 
due to foreign exchange movements are transferred to the 
GFECRA in accordance with the SARB Act.
1.5.6 V aluable art
The fair value of valuable art is determined based on the price 
at which an orderly transaction to sell the assets would take 
place between market participants at the measurement date 
under current market conditions.
Revaluations of valuable art are performed every three years 
by an independent reliable valuator to ensure that the carrying 
amount does not differ materially from that which would be 
determined using fair value at the end of the reporting period. 
In the absence of an official fair value assessment by an 
independent valuator the insured value will be used as an 
indicator of fair value.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   125 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.5 Fair value continued 
If an asset’s carrying amount is increased as a result of a 
revaluation, the increase shall be recognised in OCI and 
accumulated in equity under the heading of PPE revaluation 
reserve. However, the increase shall be recognised in profit 
or loss to the extent that it reverses a revaluation decrease 
of the same asset previously recognised in profit or loss.
If an asset’s carrying amount is decreased as a result of a 
revaluation the decrease shall be recognised in profit or loss. 
However, the decrease shall be recognised in OCI to the 
extent of any credit balance existing in the revaluation 
reserve in respect of that asset. The decrease recognised in 
OCI reduces the amount accumulated in equity under the 
heading of revaluation reserve.
The PPE revaluation reserve included in equity in respect of 
an item of valuable art may be transferred directly to 
accumulated profit when the asset is derecognised.
1.6  For eign currency – exchange gains 
or losses arising in entity accounts
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the 
functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at 
the date of the transactions. Foreign exchange profits or 
losses of the SARB insofar as they arise from changes in 
the value of the rand compared to other currencies are for 
the account of the SA government and consequently all 
these profits or losses are transferred to the GFECRA in 
terms of sections 25 to 28 of the SARB Act. Investment 
returns on foreign exchange reserves and interest paid on 
foreign loans are for the account of the SARB and are 
accounted for in profit or loss. Gains and losses on 
conversion to the functional currency are recognised in profit 
or loss for the subsidiaries and associate.
1.7 Pr operty, plant and equipment
PPE are tangible items that are held by the Group for use in 
the production or supply of goods or services for rental to 
others or for administrative purposes; and are expected to 
be used for more than one period.
PPE are recognised as an asset when:
• it is probable that expected future economic benefits 
attributable to the asset will flow to the entity, and
• the cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
PPE are initially recognised at cost.
Freehold land and items under construction are subsequently 
carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses. Valuable 
art whose fair value can be measured reliably is carried at the 
revalued amount, which is the fair value at the date of the 
revaluation less any subsequent accumulated impairment 
losses. Other PPE items are subsequently carried at cost less 
accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses.
Depreciation is determined separately for each significant part of 
an item of Property, plant and equipment and is charged so as 
to write off the cost of the assets (other than land, valuable art 
and items under construction) to their residual value over their 
estimated useful life using the straight-line method. Land and 
valuable art have indefinite useful lives and are not depreciated. 
Depreciation is included as part of operating costs in the 
statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
Items under construction are not yet available for use, therefore 
these items are not depreciated. The residual values, useful life 
and the depreciation method of assets are reviewed at each 
reporting date and adjusted if appropriate.
The estimated average useful lives of assets are as follows:
Item 
Depreciation 
method 
Average  
useful life 
(years)
Buildings Straight line 50
Land Not depreciated Indefinite
Furniture and equipment Straight line 2 to 28
Vehicles Straight line 5 to 7
Valuable art Not depreciated Indefinite
Work in progress Not depreciated 
Work in progress consists of items under construction and is 
measured at cost. Work in progress is transferred to the 
related category of assets and depreciated accordingly when 
the asset is completed and available for use.
Subsequent costs are included in the carrying amount of the 
asset only when it is probable that future economic benefits 
associated with the items will flow to the Group and the cost of 
the item can be measured reliably. All repairs and maintenance 
costs are charged to profit or loss when incurred.
An item of Property, plant and equipment is derecognised 
upon disposal or when no future economic benefits are 
expected from its continued use or disposal. Any gain or loss 
arising from the derecognition of a PPE item is included in the 
profit or loss.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
126 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.8 Intangible assets
Intangible assets are identifiable non-monetary assets 
without physical substance which the Group holds for its 
own use and which are expected to be used for more than 
one year. This includes internally generated assets and 
purchased computer software. Internally generated assets 
are disclosed separately.
Purchased software and the direct costs associated with 
the customisation and installation thereof are capitalised.
Amortisation is provided to write down the intangible assets 
on a straight-line basis to their residual values. The residual 
value of an intangible asset with a finite useful life is 
assumed to be zero unless it is expected that the intangible 
asset will be disposed of before the end of its economic life. 
Amortisation is included as part of operating costs in the 
statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income. 
The residual values, amortisation period and the 
amortisation method for intangible assets are reviewed at 
each reporting date and adjusted if appropriate. The 
estimated average useful lives of the assets are as follows:
Item
Depreciation 
method
Average
useful life 
(years)
Purchased computer software Straight line 2 to 10
Internally generated computer 
software Straight line 2 to 10
Work in progress Not amortised 
Work in progress consists of items under develoment and is 
measured at cost. Work in progress is transferred to the 
related category of assets and amortised accordingly when 
the asset is completed and available for use.
Intangible assets are subsequently carried at cost less any 
accumulated amortisation and any impairment losses.
An intangible asset is derecognised upon disposal or when 
no future economic benefits are expected from use or 
disposal. Any gain or loss arising from the derecognition of 
an intangible asset is included in profit or loss.
1.9 Gold
Gold is held by the SARB as part of its foreign reserves. In 
terms of the SARB Act gold is recorded at the statutory rate 
at initial recognition including transaction costs. Subsequent 
to initial measurement, it is valued at the statutory price. All 
gains or losses on gold, including gold deposits, are for the 
account of the SA government and are accumulated in the 
GFECRA account.
1.10 Taxation
The taxation expense for the period comprises current and 
deferred taxation. Management periodically evaluates 
positions taken in tax returns with respect to situations in 
which applicable tax regulation is subject to interpretation. It 
establishes provisions where appropriate on the basis of 
amounts expected to be paid to the tax authorities.
Deferred taxation is provided using the liability method 
based on temporary differences. However, deferred taxation 
liabilities are not recognised if they arise from the initial 
recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than 
a business combination that at the time of the transaction 
affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss. The 
amount of deferred taxation provided is based on the 
expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying 
amount of assets and liabilities using taxation laws enacted 
or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
1.11 Employee benefits
1.11.1 Pension and r etirement funds
Group companies operate various pension schemes. The 
schemes are funded through employer and employee 
contributions to insurance companies or trustee-
administered funds. All funds in which the Group 
participates are defined contribution funds; however, there is 
an element within the SARB Retirement Fund which is 
deemed to be defined benefit in nature. This element as 
detailed in note 20.3 is treated according to the principles 
of a defined benefit plan.
1.11.1.1 Defined benefit plans
A defined benefit plan is a pension plan that defines an 
amount of pension benefit that an employee will receive on 
retirement, usually dependent on one or more factors such 
as age, years of service and compensation.
The expected costs of post-employment defined benefits 
are charged to profit or loss over the expected service life of 
the employees entitled to these benefits according to the 
projected unit credit method. Costs are actuarially assessed 
and expense adjustments and past-service costs resulting 
from plan amendments are amortised over the expected 
average remaining service life of the employees.
The liability recognised in the statement of financial position 
in respect of defined benefit pension plans is the present 
value of the defined benefit obligation at the reporting date 
together with adjustments for unrecognised actuarial gains 
or losses and past-service costs. The present value of the 
defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the 
estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of 
high-quality corporate bonds that are denominated in the 
currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have 
terms to maturity approximating the terms of the related 
pension liability.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   127 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.11 Employee benefits continued
1.11.1 Pension and r etirement funds continued
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience 
adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are 
charged or credited to equity in OCI in the period in which 
they arise. Remeasurements are not classified to profit or 
loss in subsequent periods. Past-service costs are 
recognised in profit or loss at the earlier of the following 
dates: (i) when the plan amendment or curtailment occurs 
or (ii) when the entity recognises related restructuring costs 
or termination benefits.
1.11.1.2 Defined contribution plans
A defined contribution plan is a pension plan under which 
the Group pays fixed contributions into a separate entity or 
fund. The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to 
pay further contributions if the fund does not hold sufficient 
assets to pay all employees’ benefits relating to employee 
service in the current and prior periods.
For defined contribution plans the Group pays contributions 
to publicly or privately administered pension plans on a 
mandatory contractual or voluntary basis. The contributions 
are recognised as employee benefit expenses when they 
are due.
1.11.2 Post-employment benefits
The SARB provides post-employment medical and group life 
benefits to qualifying employees and retired personnel by 
subsidising a portion of their medical aid and group life 
contributions.
Entitlement to these benefits is based on employment prior to 
a certain date and is conditional on employees remaining in 
service up to retirement age. The expected costs of post-
employment defined benefits are charged to profit or loss 
over the expected service life of the employees entitled to 
these benefits according to the projected unit credit method. 
Costs are actuarially assessed and expense adjustments and 
past-service costs resulting from plan amendments are 
amortised over the expected average remaining service life of 
the employees.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience 
adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are 
charged or credited to OCI in the period in which they arise. 
Past-service costs are recognised immediately in profit or 
loss to the extent that they relate to retired employees or 
past service.
1.11.3 Leave pay accrual
Employee entitlements to annual leave and long-service 
leave are recognised when they accrue to employees.
The leave pay accrual at the reporting date represents the 
present obligation to employees as a result of employees’ 
services provided up to the reporting date. The accrual is 
measured as the amount that is expected to be paid as a 
result of the unutilised leave entitlement that has 
accumulated at the reporting date.
1.12 Sale and r epurchase agreements
The Group enters into sale and repurchase agreements with 
external counterparties as part of its monetary policy 
activities. Where securities are sold under agreement to 
repurchase at a specific future date at a specific future price 
in exchange for cash, the securities sold are not 
derecognised. A liability for the amount received is 
recognised in deposits and measured at amortised cost.
Where the Group purchases securities under agreement to 
resell at a specific future date at a specific future price in 
exchange for cash, the securities purchased are not 
recognised by the Group. These transactions are in 
substance collateralised advances. The advances are 
recognised as part of accommodation to banks and 
measured at amortised cost.
The differences between the purchase and sale prices are 
treated as interest and amortised over the expected life of 
the instruments using the effective interest method.
1.13 Inventories
Inventories are measured at the lower of cost and net 
realisable value. Net realisable value is the estimated selling 
price in the ordinary course of business less the cost of 
completion and selling expenses.
Redundant and slow-moving inventories are identified and 
written down to their estimated economic or realisable 
values. Raw materials are valued at cost according to the 
first-in, first-out basis by subsidiaries. Some raw materials 
are valued at standard cost which closely approximates 
actual cost on a first-in, first-out basis.
Consumable stores are valued at the weighted-average cost 
price. Maintenance spares are valued at average cost.
Finished goods and work in progress are valued at direct 
costs of conversion and production overheads on a 
first-in, first-out basis. Production overheads are  
included in the cost of manufactured goods based on 
normal operating capacity.
Note-printing and coin-minting expenses include ordering 
printing, minting, freight, insurance and handling costs. 
These costs are recorded as part of work in progress for the 
SABN and the SA Mint and are released to profit or loss 
when the currency is sold to the SARB.
1.14 Cost of new curr ency
The SARB recognises the cost of new currency in profit or 
loss when the banknotes and coin are delivered and the 
significant risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to 
the SARB.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
128 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.15 Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of deposits with banks 
and other short-term highly liquid money market investments 
with original maturities of three months or less (91 days and 
less). Where the maturity date falls on a weekend or a public 
holiday the next business day convention will apply; however, 
the investment will still be considered a 91-day investment. In 
the separate financial statements, no cash and cash 
equivalents are reflected due to the SARB’s role as a central 
bank in the creation of money.
The statement of cash flows includes cash on hand, bank 
deposits and money market instruments. This has been 
presented on the indirect method of presentation.
1.16 Provisions
Provisions are liabilities of uncertain timing or amount and are 
recognised when the Group has a present legal or 
constructive obligation as a result of past events for which it 
is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be 
required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can 
be made of the amount of the obligation. Provisions are 
measured at management’s estimate of the expenditure 
required to settle that obligation at the end of each reporting 
period and are discounted (at a pre-tax rate that reflects 
current market assessments of the time value of money and 
the risks specific to the liability) to present value where the 
effect is material. Provisions are not recognised for future 
operating losses.
1.17 CODI protection for covered deposits
In terms of legislation, CODI is required to pay qualifying 
depositors a limited amount of their covered deposits, in the 
unlikely event that a bank fails. A contingent liability is 
disclosed in this regard in note 33.4. 
When a bank is placed in resolution, a liability will be 
recognised on the statement of financial position, measured 
at management's best estimate of the amount required to 
settle the liability. 
1.18 Revenue r ecognition
1.18.1 Net inter est income
Net interest income or expense is recognised using the 
effective interest method, taking into account the principal 
outstanding and the effective interest rate over the period to 
maturity. Net interest income is recognised in profit or loss.
Where financial assets have been impaired interest income 
continues to be recognised on the impaired value based on 
the original effective interest rate. Interest income includes the 
amortisation of any discount or premium or other differences 
between the initial carrying amount of an interest-bearing 
instrument and its amount at maturity calculated on an 
effective interest basis.
Interest income for all financial assets measured at FVPL is 
presented separately from interest income from financial assets 
measured at amortised cost.
1.18.2 Operating income
Operating income consists of revenue from contracts with 
customers within the scope of IFRS 15: Revenue from 
Contracts with Customers (IFRS 15) and operating income 
outside the scope of IFRS 15.
1.18.2.1 Operating income within the scope of IFRS 15
For contracts within the scope of IFRS 15, the Group 
recognises revenue in a manner that depicts the transfer of 
promised services to customers in an amount that reflects the 
consideration to which the Group expects to be entitled in 
exchange for those services.
Revenue from contracts with customers comprises the 
following items:
Settlement commission income
The SARB provides settlement services for both thethe NPS 
and SADC-RTGS. The performance obligation of the SARB is 
to receive and process settlement instructions on behalf of 
NPS and SADC-RTGS participants. Revenue is recognised at 
the point in time when the performance obligation has been 
satisfied (i.e. settlement instruction has been executed).
Bulk cash service fees
The SARB earns fees on banknote deposit and banknote 
withdrawal services provided to users of bulk cash services. The 
performance obligation of the SARB is the distinct service of 
accepting a deposit or performing a withdrawal of bulk cash. 
The consideration is variable depending on the number of notes 
being deposited or withdrawn and the penalties charged on the 
condition of the bank notes on deposit. The performance 
obligation is satisfied when the SARB has successfully 
processed a deposit or withdrawal. Revenue is recognised at a 
point in time when the deposit or withdrawal is accepted.
Bank charges
The SARB provides banking services to the SA government on 
a monthly basis and earns revenue in the form of bank 
charges. The performance obligations of the SARB is to 
provide banking services which include but are not limited to 
electronic funds transfers (EFTs), foreign and local payments, 
and deposits from commercial banks. The performance 
obligations are satisfied when the SARB executes the specific 
transaction. The bank charges are recognised at a point in time 
when the service has been rendered.
Sale of banknotes and coin
The SABN and the SA Mint produce and sell banknotes and 
coin to the SARB and other third parties. The timing of revenue 
recognition is at a point in time when (or as) the related 
performance obligations are satisfied by transferring the 
promised goods to customers.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   129 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.18 Revenue r ecognition continued 
Management fees
The Bank receives management fees from the CPD, SARB 
Retirement Fund, SABN and SA Mint.
A fee is charged to the SABN and SA Mint for the secretariat 
support provided by the SARB Group Secretariat, including 
meeting facilitation, minute-taking, circulation of resolutions 
and the fulfilment of certain legislative requirements in terms 
of the Companies Act as well as overall governance services 
and support.
A fee is charged to the SARB Retirement Fund for the 
provision of consulting support services and administrative 
and accounting duties.
A fee is charged to the CPD for all the functions the SARB 
performs for the CPD. The SARB carries out all the CPD 
functions as the CPD has no employees of its own.
These performance obligations are satisfied over time. The 
fees are payable monthly. Revenue is recognised monthly.
1.18.2.2  Operating income outside the scope of  
IFRS 15
The income below relates to amounts received that are 
outside the scope of IFRS 15.
Licence fees
Annual licence fees are fees charged by the SARB in 
accordance with legislation to institutions that have been 
granted licences to operate as a bank or as an insurance 
business. Fees are payable in advance on an annual basis and 
non-refundable. Revenue is recognised annually when the fees 
are due.
Levies 
Annual levies are charged by CODI and the PA to financial 
instititutions, in accordance with legislation, to cover 
operating costs. Levies are recognised in profit or loss  
per the amount invoiced, in the period in which the  
amount relates.
Premiums
Monthly premiums are charged by CODI to member banks, 
in accordance with legislation, to fund the DIF from which 
covered depositors are paid in the event of a bank failure. 
Premiums are recognised in profit or loss per the amount 
invoiced, in the period in which the amount relates.
Sundry income 
Sundry income relates mainly to recoveries of expenses 
previously incurred. These amounts are recognised as 
income when it is probable that the amount will be received. 
1.18.3 Other income
Other income relates to non-operating income that is 
outside the scope of IFRS 15. Currently, other income 
consists of amounts from the government, to promote the 
policy solvency of the SARB. The income is subject to 
parliamentary approval and is recognised in the period in 
which parliamentary approval is obtained.
1.19 Dividends paid
In terms of the SARB Act the SARB is permitted to declare 
dividends from its accumulated profits. This is capped at a 
total dividend rate of 10% per annum on the paid-up share 
capital of the SARB.
1.20 Related parties
As per IAS 24: Related Party Disclosures (IAS 24), the 
financial statements must contain the disclosures necessary 
to draw attention to the possibility that the Group’s financial 
position and profit or loss may have been affected by the 
existence of related parties and by transactions and 
outstanding balances with such parties.
Related parties include but are not limited to subsidiaries, 
the associate, members of management who hold positions 
of responsibility within the Group, including those charged 
with governance in accordance with legislation, and 
members of management who are responsible for the 
strategic direction of the Group and entrusted with 
significant authority. Their remuneration may be established 
by statute or by another body independent of the Group. 
Their responsibilities may enable them to influence the 
benefits of office that flow to them, their related parties or 
parties that they represent on the governing body.
1.21 Shar e capital
Issued ordinary shares are classified as equity and measured 
at cost. 
1.22  Key accounting estimates and 
judgements
In preparing the Group’s financial statements management 
applies judgement and makes estimates. Estimates and 
judgements are reviewed on an ongoing basis and are based 
on historical experience and other factors, including 
expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable 
under the circumstances.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
130 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.22  Key accounting estimates and 
judgements continued
1.22.1 Fair value of financial instruments
Other than the items listed below, there were no significant 
changes to the Group’s estimates and assumptions in the 
current or prior year. Financial instruments are priced with 
reference to quoted market prices in an actively traded 
market.
If the market for a financial asset is not active or an 
instrument is an unlisted instrument, the fair value is 
estimated using valuation techniques. These include 
reference to other instruments that are substantially the 
same discounted cash flow analysis and option-pricing 
models.
When a discounted cash flow analysis is used to determine 
the value of financial assets, estimated future cash flows are 
based on management’s best estimates and the discount 
rate at the reporting date is a market-related rate for a 
financial asset with similar terms and conditions.
Where option-pricing models are used inputs based on 
observable market indicators at the reporting date are only 
recognised to the extent that they relate to changes in factors 
that market participants will consider in setting a price.
1.22.2  Measur ement of expected credit loss 
allowance
The measurement of the ECL allowance for financial assets 
measured at amortised cost and FVOCI is an area that 
requires complex models and significant assumptions about 
future economic conditions and credit behaviour (e.g. the 
likelihood of counterparties defaulting and the resulting 
losses). Explanation of the inputs assumptions and 
estimation techniques used in measuring ECL is further 
detailed in note 29.2 which also sets out key sensitivities of 
the ECL to changes in these elements.
A number of significant judgements are also required in 
applying the accounting requirements for measuring ECL 
such as:
• determining criteria for SICR;
• choosing appropriate models and assumptions for the 
measurement of ECL;
• establishing the number and relative weightings of 
forward-looking scenarios for each type of product or 
market and the associated ECL; and
• establishing groups of similar financial assets for the 
purposes of measuring ECL.
Detailed information about the judgements and estimates 
made by the Group in the above areas is set out in 
note 28.2.2.
1.22.3 Fair value of unlisted investments
Judgement is exercised in assessing the fair value of 
unlisted investments held by the Group. A discounted cash 
flow analysis is used by the Group to determine the value of 
its unlisted investments by applying an appropriate discount 
rate to the best estimate of future cash flows of the 
investee. The key assumptions applied in the discounted 
cash flow valuation method are the equity market risk 
premium, SA risk free rate, and the alpha and beta to 
determine the overall discount rate. Free cash flows for a 
period of three to five years are provided by the investee 
and further assessed by management. Detailed information 
about the estimates made by the Group in the above areas 
is set out in note 34.
1.22.4 Post-employment benefits
The cost of the defined benefit pension plans and other 
benefit plans as well as the present value of the benefit 
obligations are determined using actuarial valuations. An 
actuarial valuation involves using various assumptions 
determined by management and reviewed annually by the 
actuary that may differ from future developments.
These assumptions include:
• discount rates;
• inflation rates;
• rates of compensation increases;
• rates of pension increases;
• medical cost trends; and
• mortality rates.
Actuarial valuations are performed annually in accordance 
with the requirements of IAS 19. Statutory actuarial 
valuations are performed triennially, in accordance with 
legislative requirements. 
1.22.5 Inventory valuations
The Group’s currency-producing subsidiaries measure 
inventory at the lower of cost and net realisable value. The 
determination of net realisable value is an entity-specific 
estimate and requires the use of judgement.
1.22.6 Pr operty, plant and equipment
Judgement is required when determining:
• the costs that are attributable to the asset;
• for assets where valuation is applied, the fair value of the 
valuable art;
• the appropriate useful life over which the assets should be 
depreciated or amortised;
• the depreciation method; and
• whether the existing assets are subject to impairment.
Notes to the consolidated and separate  
financial statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   131 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies continued
1.22  Key accounting estimates and 
judgements continued 
1.22.7 Or der of liquidity
As a financial institution, the Group presents its assets and 
liabilities on the statement of financial position in order of 
liquidity. This provides information that is reliable and more 
relevant than a current or non-current presentation because 
the entity does not supply goods or services within a clearly 
identifiable operating cycle.
The order of liquidity requires judgement, particularly in light of 
the nature of the SARB’s operations and mandate as the 
central bank of South Africa. The SARB’s mandate regarding 
the management and oversight of the domestic financial 
market results in regular changes to the liquidity of the SARB’s 
assets and liabilities in response to the liquidity requirements of 
the market. The SARB continuously monitors and actively 
manages its liquidity requirements.
1.22.8 Lease identification
In certain circumstances the determination of whether a 
contract is or contains a lease requires significant judgement. 
The Group has assessed that the contracts with the SABN 
and the SA Mint for the production and supply of banknotes 
respectively, do not contain a lease as defined by IFRS 16 due 
to leased items being unidentifiable.
1.23 Leases
The Group assesses whether a contract is or contains a lease, 
at the inception of the contract. A contract is or contains a 
lease if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an 
identified asset for a period of time in exchange for 
consideration.
To assess whether a contract is or contains a lease, 
management determines whether the asset under 
consideration is 'identified', which means that the asset is 
either explicitly or implicitly specified in the contract and that 
the supplier does not have a substantial right of substitution 
throughout the period of use. Once management has 
concluded that the contract deals with an identified asset, the 
right to control the use thereof is considered. To this end, 
control over the use of an identified asset only exists when the 
Group has the right to obtain substantially all the economic 
benefits from the use of the asset as well as the right to direct 
the use of the asset.
Group as lessee 
A lease liability and corresponding right of use asset are 
recognised at the lease commencement date for all lease 
agreements for which the Group is a lessee.
The various lease and non-lease components of contracts 
containing leases are accounted for separately, with 
consideration being allocated to each lease component on the 
basis of the relative stand-alone prices of the lease 
components and the aggregate stand-alone price of the 
non-lease components (where non-lease components exist).
The Group does not have any lease liabilities as all lease 
payments were made upfront before the commencement of 
the lease. Details of leasing arrangements where the Group is 
a lessee are presented in note 12.
Right of use assets
Right of use assets are presented within PPE on the 
consolidated and separate statement of financial position.
Right of use assets are subsequently measured at cost less 
accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Right of use assets are depreciated over the shorter period of 
lease term and useful life of the underlying asset.
Depreciation starts at the commencement date of a lease.
For right of use assets which are depreciated over their useful 
lives, the useful lives are determined consistently with items of 
the same class of PPE. Refer to the accounting policy for PPE 
for details of useful lives.
The depreciation charge for each year is recognised in  
profit or loss unless it is included in the carrying amount of 
another asset.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
132 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
2. Cash and cash equivalents
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amortised cost
Bank and cash balances 37 691 16 034 – –
South African money market investments 39 180 31 347 – –
Short–term South African fixed deposits 13 182 14 362 – –
Total cash and cash equivalents 90 053 61 743 – –
Owing to its role in the creation and withdrawal of money, the SARB has no cash and cash equivalents balances in its statement of 
financial position.
Cash equivalents comprise short-term, highly liquid financial instruments with an original maturity of less than three months that are 
readily convertible to known amounts of cash, are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value and are held for the purpose of 
meeting short-term commitments as reflected above.
Annual interest rates range between 7.75–7.95% (2024: 8.50–8.63%) on short-term South African fixed deposits with financial 
institutions and 7.53–7.62% (2024: 7.11–8.50%) on South African money market investments.
Cash and cash equivalents exclude local and foreign short-term investments held to implement monetary policy or as part of foreign 
reserves. These reserves are disclosed in detail in notes 3 and 6.
Restricted cash and cash equivalents amount to R17 million (2024: Rnil) and relate to DIF investments which may only be used by 
CODI for payouts to depositors in the event of a bank failure, as well as payments in support of other bank resolution strategies as 
determined by the SARB. 
The DIF investments included in the Group cash and cash equivalents relate to Shari’ah compliant investments held with other 
financial instutitions and earn investment income linked to the repo rate. Cash investments held by CODI with the SARB are disclosed 
as interest-bearing deposits in amounts due to Group companies. Refer to note 34.4 
Maturity structure of financial assets
Within 1 month 67 962 34 480 – –
Between 1 and 3 months
 22 091 27 263 – –
Total financial assets 90 053 61 743 – –
Included in South African money market investments ar
e repo agreements, the following table presents details thereof:
Fair value of repo agreements 13 182 14 362 – –
Fair value of collateral received 13 290 14 409 – –
Fair value of collateral permitted to sell or repledge  
at the reporting date 13 290 16 480 – –
Collateral cover 100% 100%
Maturity date 10 April 2025 04 April 2024
The counterparties are exposed to interest rate risk on the various securities pledged as collateral for the repo agreements. The Group 
has the ability to sell or repledge these securities in the event of default. When the underlying investments mature, the Group has the 
obligation to return the collateral.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   133 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
3. Accommodation to banks
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amortised cost
Advances under repurchase agreements 250 451 250 451
Standing facility 103 – 103 –
Total accommodation to banks 353 451 353 451
Accommodation to banks represents short-term lending to commercial banks. 
Repo agreements
The standard repo agreements yield interest at the repo rate (2024: repo rate) of the SARB. 
Standard repo agreements 7.50% 8.25% 7.50% 8.25%
The following table presents details of collateral received for repo agreements (including accrued interest):
Fair value of collateral received 251 450 251 450
Fair value of collateral permitted to sell or repledge at 
the reporting date 251 450 251 450
Collateral cover 100% 100% 100% 100%
The collateral received consists of various SA government bonds and Treasury bills with maturities ranging from 1 to 26 years (2024: 1 
to 26 years).
There were no defaults in the current financial year (2024: no defaults). The ECL for repo agreements has been assessed to be 
immaterial (2024: immaterial).
The counterparties are exposed to interest rate and other risks on the various securities pledged as collateral for the repo agreements. 
Refer to note 29.1 for further disclosure on interest rate risk. The SARB has the ability to sell or repledge these securities in the event 
of default. When the underlying repos are settled, the SARB has the obligation to return the collateral.
Standing facility
The standing facility through which the SARB provides liquidity to commercial banks yields interest at the repo rate of the SARB plus 
1% (2024: repo plus 1%).
Standing facility 8.50% 9.25% 8.50% 9.25%
The following table presents details of collateral received for the standing facility (including accrued interest):
Fair value of collateral received 103 – 103 –
Fair value of collateral permitted to sell or repledge at
the reporting date 103 – 103 –
Collateral cover 100% – 100% –
The collateral received consists of SA government bonds and Treasury bills with maturities ranging from 16 to 35 years (2024: 16 to 
35 years).
At the reporting date, none of the collateralised advances were past due or impaired (2024: none). There were no defaults in the current 
financial year (2024: no defaults). The ECL for the standing facility has been assessed to be immaterial (2024: immaterial).
The counterparties are exposed to interest rate and other risks on the various securities pledged as collateral for the standing facility. 
Refer to note 29.1.1 for further disclosure on interest rate risk. The SARB has the ability to sell or repledge these securities in the event of 
default. When the underlying facility is settled, the SARB has the obligation to return the collateral.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
134 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
4. Investments
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amortised cost
Short-term South African fixed deposits – 19 153 – –
Short-term South African money market investments 82 4 133 – –
Long-term amortising notes 355 – – –
ECL allowance (12) – – –
Mandatory FVPL –
Short-term South African money market investments – 351 – –
Total investments 425 23 637 – –
Maturity structure of financial assets
Within 1 month 73 2 465 – –
Between 1 and 3 months – 19 148 – –
Between 3 and 12 months – 2 024 – –
More than 12 months 352 – – –
Total financial assets 425 23 637 – –
For investments that meet the definition of financial assets at mandatory FVPL:
Maximum exposure to credit risk – 351 – –
Short-term South African money market investments consist of instruments that have an original maturity of more than 91 days or 
three months.
All investments are placed in accordance with investment guidelines approved by the Boards of the respective subsidiaries.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   135 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
5. Other assets
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amortised cost
Financial assets
LGS margin entitlement and credit premium receivable 31 554 31 554
Loans and advances to staff 351 339 351 339
Other financial assets 1 207 793 870 686
Non-financial assets
Treasury SDR account – 491 – 491
Other non-financial assets 697 588 630 476
Value-added taxation 70 51 70 51
Total other assets 2 356 2 816 1 952 2 597
Maturity structure of financial assets
Within 1 month 1 207 793 870 686
Between 1 and 12 months 2 339 2 339
More than 1 year 380 554 380 554
Total financial assets 1 589 1 686 1 252 1 579
 
Financial assets are neither past due nor impaired (2024: none).
Loans and advances to staff consist of vehicle finance, home loans and other advances to staff and yields interest at repo plus 1% 
(2024: repo plus 1%).
Other financial assets consist mainly of trade receivables and receivables related to liquidity management.
Other non-financial assets consist mainly of prepaid expenses.
Margin entitlement and credit premium receivable
In terms of the LGS agreement, participating commercial banks are required to pay certain amounts described below to the margin 
entitlement and credit premium receivable accounts that are in the name of the SARB for the duration of the facility.
The margin entitlement is calculated as the prime rate that the eligible client pays to the commercial bank minus the agreed rate (repo) 
payable by commercial banks to SARB minus the cost of capital, statutory costs and administration fees in respect of the COVID-19 
loan. A 0.5% portion of this margin is the credit premium, which is then transferred to the credit premium account.
As at 31 March 2025, an amount of R31 million (2024: R554 million) has been recognised with a corresponding provision for credit 
loss claims in other liabilities. Refer to note 18 for more information.
Margin entitlement and credit premium accounts accrue interest at the repo rate of the SARB and will be used to settle losses 
incurred by the commercial banks in terms of the LGS. Thereafter, the losses are borne by the commercial banks up to the aggregate 
amount equal to the commercial banks’ risk portion (being 6% of the aggregate amount advanced by the SARB against the facility 
amount). Any losses remaining which have not been settled as aforementioned shall be guaranteed and borne by the SARB on the 
basis that the outstanding balance shall be reduced to equal the amount of such losses.
Treasury SDR account
This account consists of all interest charged by the IMF on the liability accounts, including the IMF loan to the SA government. Refer 
to note 6.5 for more details.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
136 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
6. Gold and for eign exchange reserves
GROUP SARB
Note(s)
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Mandatory at FVPL
Money market instruments and fixed deposits 6.1 233 688 214 896 233 688 214 896
Securities 6.2 646 221 667 242 646 221 667 242
Derivatives 6.3 76 166 76 166
SARB Act
Gold coin, bullion and deposits 6.4 231 195 169 535 231 195 169 535
IMF SDR assets 6.5 124 521 127 186 124 521 127 186
Total gold and foreign exchange reserves 1 235 701 1 179 025 1 235 701 1 179 025
6.1 Money market instruments and fixed deposits
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Cash and money market accounts 10 691 9 129 10 691 9 129
Fixed deposits 222 997 205 767 222 997 205 767
Total money market instruments and fixed deposits 233 688 214 896 233 688 214 896
Maturity structure
Up to
1 month
R mil
Total
R mil
Group and SARB 2025
Cash and money market accounts 10 691 10 691
Fixed deposits 222 997 222 997
Total money market instruments and fixed deposits 233 688 233 688
Group and SARB 2024
Cash and money market accounts 9 129 9 129
Fixed deposits 205 767 205 767
Total money market instruments and fixed deposits 214 896 214 896
The foreign exchange balances yield investment returns achievable in the various currencies in which they are invested. It is not 
practicable to calculate effective yields on the portfolios due to the volatility caused by exchange rate fluctuations.
  
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   137 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
6. Gold and for eign exchange reserves continued
6.2 Securities
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Asset-backed securities 2 536 2 816 2 536 2 816
Certificate of deposits 57 173 45 973 57 173 45 973
Commercial papers 48 952 58 008 48 952 58 008
Corporate bonds 9 994 4 581 9 994 4 581
Financial bonds 98 5 328 98 5 328
Government agency, state, supranational bonds 154 195 182 042 154 195 182 042
Government bonds 239 657 260 609 239 657 260 609
Mortgage-backed securities 17 093 16 839 17 093 16 839
Other investments 3 238 166 3 238 166
Treasury bills
   113 285 90 880 113 285 90 880
Total securities 646 221 667 242 646 221 667 242
CURRENT NON-CURRENT
Maturity structure
Up to
1 month
R mil
1–3 
months
R mil
4–6 
months
R mil
7–12
 months
R mil
1–3 
years
R mil
3–5 
years
R mil
More than
5 years
R mil
Total
R mil
Group and SARB 2025
Financial assets at 
mandatory FVPL 58 407 108 183 113 480 89 849 183 176 71 023 22 103 646 221
Total securities 58 407 108 183 113 480 89 849 183 176 71 023 22 103 646 221
Group and SARB 2024
Financial assets at 
mandatory FVPL 46 202 118 325 95 154 129 846 190 131 66 967 20 617 667 242
Total securities 46 202 118 325 95 154 129 846 190 131 66 967 20 617 667 242
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
138 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
6. Gold and for eign exchange reserves continued
6.3 Derivatives
The SARB utilises financial derivative products for portfolio management purposes and seeks to minimise the effects of currency and 
interest rate risks by using such instruments to economically hedge the related risk exposures. The use of financial derivatives is 
governed by the SARB’s policies approved by the GEC which provides written principles on the use of derivative financial instruments. 
Compliance with policies and exposure limits is reviewed by management on a continuous basis. Risk management practices also 
include regular reporting to the RMC and BREC. The SARB does not enter into or trade financial instruments including derivative 
financial instruments for proprietary trading purposes.
     
Net fair
value
R mil
Fair value
of assets
R mil
Fair value
of liabilities
R mil
Contract/
notional
amount1
R mil
Group and SARB 2025
FECs 9 19 (10) 25 772
Futures contracts 67 103 (36) 45 415
Total derivatives 76 122 (46) 71 187
Group and SARB 2024
FECs 170 177 (7) 26 430
Futures contracts (4) 26 (29) 30 627
Total derivatives 166 203 (36) 57 057
1  The notional amount of a financial instrument is the nominal or face value that is used to calculate payments made on that inst rument. The amount generally does not settle 
between the counterparties.
     
6.3.1  Of fsetting financial assets and financial liabilities relating to gold and foreign exchange 
reserves
The SARB is subject to an enforceable master netting arrangement with its derivative counterparties. Under the terms of this 
agreement, offsetting of derivatives is permitted only in the event of bankruptcy or default of either party to the agreement. There is  
no intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously. The details are presented in the  
table below:
Gross 
amounts
presented in
derivatives
R mil
Offset
R mil
Net 
amounts
presented in 
derivatives 
R mil
Related amounts not set off 
in derivatives
Net
amount
R mil
Instruments
which offset 
on default
R mil
Collateral
amount
received
R mil
Group and SARB 2025
FEC assets 19 – 19 (8) – 11
FEC liabilities (10) – (10) 8 – (2)
Group and SARB 2024
FEC assets 177 – 177 (6) – 171
FEC liabilities (7) – (7) 6 – (1)
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   139 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
6. Gold and for eign exchange reserves continued
6.4 Gold coin, bullion and deposits
6.4.1 Gold coin and bullion
R mil Fine ounces
Group and SARB 2025
As at 31 March 2024 169 535 4 032 738
  Purchases during the year 14 522 287 905
  Sales during the year (20 900) (412 015)
  Change in the statutory price 60 873 –
As at 31 March 2025 224 030 3 908 628
Group and SARB 2024
As at 31 March 2023 141 895 4 031 923
  Purchases during the year 469 12 754
  Sales during the year (438) (11 939)
  Change in the statutory price 27 609 –
As at 31 March 2024 169 535 4 032 738
Gold coin and bullion consist of 3 908 628 fine ounces at the statutory price of R57 317 per ounce (2024: 4 032 738 fine ounces at 
R42 040 per ounce).
6.4.2 Gold deposits
R mil Fine ounces
Group and SARB 2025
As at 31 March 2024 – –
  Gold deposits 6 359 125 000
  Change in the statutory price 806 –
As at 31 March 2025 7 165 125 000
Gold deposits consist of 125 000 fine ounces at the statutory price of R57 317 per ounce as at 31 March 2025 (2024: Rnil), and earn a 
return ranging from 3–5 basis points.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
140 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
6.5 IMF SDR assets
In accordance with the SARB Act, the SARB serves as the fiscal agent for the SA government in its dealings with international 
financial institutions (IFIs). This includes transactions with IFIs and performing financial agency work on behalf of the government. 
In compliance with the SARB Act, the accounts with the IMF which records all transactions with the IMF have been included in 
these financial statements. Refer to note 17 for the corresponding liability and notes 5 and 18 for the related interest.
The IMF has created an international reserve asset called the SDR. All rights in, and commitments to the IMF are denominated in 
XDRs. The value of the XDR is calculated on the basis of a currency basket comprising the US dollar, euro, Chinese yuan, Japanese 
yen and pound sterling. The currency weights are adjusted each year in accordance with changes in bilateral foreign exchange rates. 
As at 31 March 2025, XDR1 was equal to R24.40 (2024: R25.18).
The various rights are disclosed below:
 
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
SDR Holdings1 108 600 110 760 108 600 110 760
IMF New Arrangements to Borrow financial transactions 
plan account 15 921 16 426 15 921 16 426
Total IMF SDR assets 124 521 127 186 124 521 127 186
1 The SDR asset carries inter est at an effective rate of 3.09% (2024: 4.11%). SA government promissory notes have been pledged as collateral against these SDRs.
The following table presents details of collateral held:
Fair value of collateral received 61 426 62 063 61 426 62 063
Collateral cover 57% 56% 57% 56%
At the reporting date, none of the collateralised advances were past due or impaired (2024: none). During the year under review, no 
defaults were experienced (2024: no defaults).
7. Inventories
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Raw materials1 403 291 – –
Work in progress2 995 479 – –
Consumable stores 171 138 6 5
Maintenance spares 206 180 – –
Finished goods3 749 1 499 – –
Total inventories net of write-downs 2 524 2 587 6 5
Write-downs (included above) (9) (25) – –
Inventories are measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value. The costs to produce banknotes and coin are expensed as 
incurred and disclosed in note 23.2 under cost of currency.
1 Raw materials consist mainly of substrate ink metals and chemicals.
2 W ork in progress consists mainly of banknotes and coin partially completed.
3 Finished goods consists mainly of banknotes and coin r eady for delivery.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   141 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
 for the year ended 31 March 2025
8. For eign exchange contract assets and liabilities
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
SARB Act
Unrealised gains on FECs 78 118 78 118
Unrealised losses on FECs (6) (24) (6) (24)
Net unrealised gains transferred to GFECRA1 72 94 72 94
1  These amounts r epresent unrealised gains and losses on FECs which will be for the account of the SA government as and when they are realised. The FECs are utilised in 
the operations of the SARB to manage monetary policy operations.
The notional amount of the FECs amounts to R10 billion (2024: R10 billion).
The SARB is subject to enforceable master netting arrangements with its derivative counterparties. Under the terms of these 
agreements, offsetting of derivatives is permitted only in the event of bankruptcy or default of either party to the agreement. There is no 
intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously. The following table presents details of this:
Related amounts not set off  
in the statement of financial position
Gross
amounts
presented
 R mil
Offset
R mil
Net
amounts
presented 
R mil
Instruments
which offset
on default
R mil
Collateral
amount
received
R mil
Net
amount
R mil
Group and SARB 2025
FEC assets 78 – 78 (74) – 4
FEC liabilities (6) – (6) 74 – 68
Group and SARB 2024
FEC assets 118 – 118 (39) – 79
FEC liabilities (24) – (24) 39 – 15
142 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
9. Loans and advances
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amortised cost
Interest-bearing local loans
LGS loan 3 213 6 268 3 213 6 268
BBS loan 637 812 637 812
EBBS loan 644 – 644 –
Total loans and advances 4 494 7 080 4 494 7 080
Interest-bearing local loans
Loan guarantee scheme
The SARB entered into a LGS with participating commercial banks for the purpose of assisting qualifying small and medium-sized 
businesses severely impacted during the COVID-19 pandemic. Drawdowns by qualifying businesses under the LGS were available for an 
11-month period commencing from the effective date (moratorium period), which was extended by a further three months to July 2021. 
The outstanding balance at the end of the moratorium period is repayable over 60 months. A facility of R100 billion was approved of 
which R90 billion was allocated to nine commercial banks.
The total outstanding balance (including interest) of R3 billion (2024: R6 billion) is guaranteed by the SARB. The guarantee is limited to 
the R3 billion allocated to the commercial banks. In turn, NT has guaranteed the SARB for losses incurred under the scheme. The 
guarantees were entered into together with the loan agreements and are therefore considered integral to the loans. The guarantees are 
incorporated in the related ECL assessment for the loans.
The loan accrues interest at the prevailing repo rate (2024: repo rate). Any default interest that accrues as a result of the commercial 
banks failing to repay the SARB at the interest repayment date will be accounted for at the default interest rate of repo rate plus 2%.
At the reporting date none of the LGS loans were past due or impaired (2024: none). During the year under review, no defaults were 
experienced (2024: no defaults).
Bounce back scheme
In April 2022, the BBS was established to assist eligible small businesses to recover from the impact of COVID-19, the floods and the 
riots that took place in the country. In terms of the scheme, the SARB advanced loans to participating commercial banks who advanced 
bounce-back loans to eligible businesses. The SARB approved facilities of R1 billion, of which R262 million was not utilised at the end of 
the availability period for drawdowns on 30 April 2023. 
The loan accrues interest at the prevailing repo rate (2024: repo rate). Any default interest that accrues as a result of the commercial 
banks failing to repay the SARB at the interest repayment date will be accounted for at the default interest rate of repo rate plus 2%. 
The SARB has issued a financial guarantee to the commercial banks under the facility, limited to 20.5% of the capital amount advanced. 
NT has guaranteed the SARB for losses incurred under the scheme up to an amount of R8 billion, limited to the amount advanced to 
the commercial banks.
The guarantees were entered into together with the loan agreements and are therefore considered integral to the loans. The guarantees 
are incorporated in the related ECL assessment for the loans. 
At the reporting date none of the BBS loans were past due or impaired (2024: none). During the current financial year, no defaults were 
experienced (2024: no defaults).
Energy bounce back scheme 
In May 2023, the EBBS was established to alleviate the impact of sustained load-shedding on small-and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
and households. In terms of the scheme, the SARB will advance loans to commercial banks who advanced energy bounce-back loans to 
eligible businesses and households. Each participating commercial bank may drawdown on the facility for a period of 18 months from the 
signature date of their respective agreements. The SARB approved facilities of R12 billion, of which R669 million was drawn down in the 
current financial year. 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
 for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   143 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
10. South African gover nment bonds
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Mandatory FVPL
Interest-bearing listed bonds 32 827 32 827 32 827 32 827
Coupon interest accrued 392 747 392 747
Fair value adjustments 1 584 (1 567) 1 584 (1 567)
Total SA government bonds 34 803 32 007 34 803 32 007
Effective interest rate 10.17% 10.21% 10.17% 10.21%
There were no purchases of SA government bonds during the current year (2024: none).
9. Loans and advances continued
Interest-bearing local loans continued
Energy bounce back scheme continued
The loan accrues interest at the prevailing repo rate (2024: repo rate). Any default interest that accrues as a result of the commercial 
banks failing to repay the SARB at the interest repayment date will be accounted for at the default interest rate of repo rate plus 2%. 
The SARB has issued a financial guarantee to the commercial banks under the facility, limited to 20.5% of the capital amount 
advanced. NT has guaranteed the SARB for losses incurred under the scheme up to an amount of R8 billion, limited to the amount 
advanced to the commercial banks. The guarantees were entered into together with the loan agreements and are therefore considered 
integral to the loans. The guarantees are incorporated in the related ECL assessment for the loans.
At the reporting date none of the EBBS loans were past due or impaired (2024: none). During the current financial year, no defaults 
were experienced (2024: no defaults).
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
 for the year ended 31 March 2025
144 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
11. Equity investment in Bank for Inter national Settlements
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
FVOCI
Opening balance 6 605 5 866 6 605 5 866
Fair value adjustments 774 417 774 417
Foreign exchange movements transferred (to)/from GFECRA (195) 322 (195) 322
Closing balance 7 184 6 605 7 184 6 605
The carrying amount that would have been recognised had the BIS shares been carried at cost was R638 million (2024:  
R658 million).
The shares held in the BIS are held as part of the SARB’s function as a central bank and are thus long-standing in nature. Shares are 
only transferable with the prior consent of the BIS.
The SARB’s investment in the BIS consists of 8 612 shares (2024: 8 612) which are carried at FVOCI. The net asset value was 
adjusted by 30%. The haircut is consistent with the methodology applied by the BIS and other central banks and is not subject to 
sensitivity. The adjusted net asset value of the shares is based on the XDR
1 of XDR34 184 (2024: XDR30 463).
Refer to note 31 for further detail on the fair value hierarchy disclosures. Changes in value due to foreign exchange movements are 
transferred to GFECRA. For the year ended 31 March 2025, a movement of R195 million (2024: R322 million) was transferred 
to GFECRA.
1  The XDR is a monetar y unit of international reserve assets defined and maintained by the IMF. The XDR also serves as the unit of account of the BIS among other 
international organisations. The unit does not represent a currency but represents a potential claim on the currencies of the IMF members for which it may be exchanged. 
It is based on a basket of international currencies comprising the US dollar, euro, Japanese yen, pound sterling and Chinese yuan.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
 for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   145 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
 for the year ended 31 March 2025
12. Pr operty, plant and equipment
2025 2024
Group
Cost/
revaluation
R mil
Accumulated
depreciation
R mil
Carrying
value
R mil
Cost/
revaluation
R mil
Accumulated
depreciation
R mil
Carrying
value
R mil
Land 158 – 158 158 – 158
Buildings 1 205 (594) 611 1 171 (542) 629
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 5 458 (3 617) 1 841 5 506 (3 644) 1 862
Valuable art 218 – 218 198 – 198
Work in progress 4 568 – 4 568 2 451 – 2 451
Total 11 607 (4 211) 7 396 9 484 (4 187) 5 297
2025 2024
SARB
Cost/
revaluation
R mil
Accumulated
depreciation
R mil
Carrying
value
R mil
Cost/
revaluation
R mil
Accumulated
depreciation
R mil
Carrying
value
R mil
Land 149 – 149 149 – 149
Buildings 864 (454) 410 832 (408) 424
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 2 492 (1 785) 707 2 465 (1 770) 695
Valuable art 218 – 218 198 – 198
Work in progress 4 391 – 4 391 2 334 – 2 334
Total 8 114 (2 239) 5 875 5 978 (2 178) 3 800
146 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
 for the year ended 31 March 2025
12. Pr operty, plant and equipment continued
Reconciliation of property, plant and equipment
Opening
 balance
R mil
Additions
R mil
Disposals
R mil
Transfers
 in/(out)
R mil
Revaluations
R mil
Reclassifications
R mil
Depreciation
R mil
Impairment
loss
R mil
Closing 
balance
R mil
Group 2025
Land 158 – – – – – – – 158
Buildings 629 2 – 32 – – (52) – 611
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 1 862 63 (2) 320 – (48) (354) – 1 841
Valuable art 198 – – – 20 – – – 218
Work in progress 2 450 2 425 – (352) – 48 – (3) 4 568
Total 5 297 2 490 (2) – 20 – (406) (3) 7 396
Group 2024
Land 158 – – – – – – – 158
Buildings 687 – (21) 18 – – (55) – 629
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 2 010 193 (77) 228 – – (492) – 1 862
Valuable art 198 – (1) 1 – – – – 198
Work in progress 822 1 993 – (247) – 3 – (121) 2 450
Total 3 875 2 186 (99) – – 3 (547) (121) 5 297
SARB 2025
Land 149 – – – – – – – 149
Buildings 424 1 (1) 31 – – (45) – 410
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 695 53 – 240 – (48) (233) – 707
Valuable art 198 – – – 20 – – – 218
Work in progress 2 334 2 283 – (271) – 48 – (3) 4 391
Total 3 800 2 337 (1) – 20 – (278) (3) 5 875
SARB 2024
Land 149 – – – – – – – 149
Buildings 477 – (22) 17 – – (48) – 424
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 726 181 (77) 200 – – (335) – 695
Valuable art 198 – (1) 1 – – – – 198
Work in progress 786 1 887 – (218) – – – (121) 2 334
Total 2 336 2 068 (100) – – – (383) (121) 3 800
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   147 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
12. Pr operty, plant and equipment continued
Leased assets
Included in PPE are right of use assets with a carrying amount of R5 million (2024: R23 million) relating to the lease of office buildings by 
the SARB. The lease term is for three years, ending on 30 June 2025. There is no lease liability in respect of this lease as the total rentals 
amounting to R55 million were paid upfront in the 2022/23 financial year, before the commencement of the lease. In the prior financial 
year, additional parking space was included in the lease, which will also be used until 30 June 2025 and the total rentals for the parking 
space, amounting to R2 million, were also paid upfront. There are no variable lease payments applicable to this lease. The right of use 
asset is depreciated on a straight-line basis over the lease term and depreciation of R19 million (2024: 
R15 million) was recognised for this lease in the current financial year.
Revaluations
The Group’s valuable art is stated at revalued amounts, being the fair value at the date of revaluation, less any subsequent accumulated 
depreciation and accumulated impairment losses. Revaluations are performed by independent, reliable valuators every three years. In the 
absence of an official fair value assessment by an independent valuator, the insured value will be used as an indicator of fair value.
The next valuation is scheduled for 31 December 2025.
Refer to note 31 for specific details regarding the valuation of the art.
The carrying value of the revalued assets under the cost model would have been:
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Valuable art 37 37 37 37
13. Intangible assets
2025 2024
GROUP
Cost
R mil
Accumulated
amortisation
R mil
Carrying
value
R mil
Cost
R mil
Accumulated
amortisation
R mil
Carrying
value
R mil
Internally generated computer software 1 688 (1 335) 353 1 137 (412) 725
Purchased computer software 1 107 (909) 198 1 658 (1 197) 461
Work in progress 771 – 771 211 – 211
Total 3 566 (2 244) 1 322 3 006 (1 609) 1 397
2025 2024
SARB
Cost
R mil
Accumulated
amortisation
R mil
Carrying
value
R mil
Cost
R mil
Accumulated
amortisation
R mil
Carrying
value
R mil
Internally generated computer software 1 688 (1 334) 354 1 137 (412) 725
Purchased computer software 995 (826) 169 1 526 (1 082) 444
Work in progress 769 – 769 198 – 198
Total 3 452 (2 160) 1 292 2 861 (1 494) 1 367
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
148 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
13. Intangible assets continued
Reconciliation of intangible assets
Opening
 balance
R mil
Additions
R mil
Disposals
R mil
Transfers 
in/(out) 
R mil
Reclassifications
R mil
Amortisation
R mil
Impairment
loss
R mil
Total
R mil
Group 2025
Internally generated computer 
software 725 17 (45) 39 207 (590) – 353
Purchased computer software 461 2 (1) 74 (230) (108) – 198
Work in progress 211 650 – (113) 23 – – 771
Total 1 397 669 (46) – – (698) – 1 322
Group 2024
Internally generated computer 
software 112 204 (1) 630 – (220) – 725
Purchased computer software 387 – (131) 282 – (77) – 461
Work in progress 1 193 134 – (912) – – (204) 211
Total 1 692 338 (132) – – (297) (204) 1 397
SARB 2025
Internally generated computer 
software 725 18 (45) 39 207 (590) – 354
Purchased computer software 444 2 (1) 56 (230) (102) – 169
Work in progress 198 643 – (95) 23 – – 769
Total 1 367 663 (46) – – (692) – 1 292
SARB 2024
Internally generated computer 
software 112 204 (1) 630 – (220) – 725
Purchased computer software 364 – (131) 282 – (71) – 444
Work in progress 1 189 125 – (912) – – (204) 198
Total 1 665 329 (132) – – (291) (204) 1 367
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   149 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
14. Deferr ed tax
GROUP SARB
Note(s)
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Balance at the beginning of the year (753) 259 (598) 450
Movements during the year:
Current year timing differences 24 142 232 157 192
Prior year adjustments 24 5 (3) – – 
Utilisation of tax losses – (1 113)  – (1 113)
Other comprehensive income (190) (128) (190) (127)
Balance at the end of the year (795) (753) (631) (598)
Comprising:
Deferred taxation liabilities (795) (753) (631) (598)
Net deferred taxation liability (795) (753) (631) (598)
Deferred taxation liabilities are attributed as set out below:
2023
R mil
Amounts
charged to
profit
or loss
R mil
Amounts 
charged
 to OCI
R mil
2024
R mil
Amounts
charged to
profit 
or loss
R mil
Amounts 
charged
 to OCI
R mil
2025
R mil
Group
Post-employment benefits 717 46 (38) 725 47 (18) 754
Prepaid expenditure and  
other items 11 – – 11 (18) – (7)
Revaluation adjustments (35) – – (35) – (4) (39)
Property, plant and equipment (605) (8) – (613) 34 – (579)
Intangible assets (243) 93 – (150) 116 – (34)
Employee benefits accrual 154 42 – 196 (9) – 187
Revenue received in advance – 30 – 30 (1) – 29
Fair value adjustments on 
BIS shares (854) – (90) (944) – (168) (1 111)
Taxation losses 1 113 (1 087) – 26 (16) – 10
Lease payments – – – – (5) – (5)
Total deferred taxation 258 (884) (128) (753) 148 (190) (795)
SARB
Post-employment benefits 662 42 (37) 667 45 (19) 693
Prepaid expenditure and  
other items (3) (1) – (4) (2) – (6)
Revaluation adjustments (35) – – (35) – (4) (39)
Property, plant and equipment (323) (14) – (337) 26 – (311)
Intangible assets (241) 93 – (148) 117 – (31)
Employee benefits accrual 132 41 – 173 (23) – 150
Revenue received in advance – 30 – 30 (1) – 29
Fair value adjustments on 
BIS shares (854) – (90) (944) – (167) (1 111)
Taxation losses 1 113 (1 113)  – – – – –
Lease payments – – – – (5) – (5)
Total deferred taxation 451 (921) (127) (598) 157 (190) (631)
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
150 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
15. Notes and coin in cir culation
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amortised cost
Notes 159 880 161 827 159 880 161 827
Coin 7 891 7 677 7 891 7 677
Total notes and coin in circulation 167 771 169 504 167 771 169 504
The liability for notes and coin issued is the net liability after offsetting notes and coin held by the SARB and not yet issued into 
circulation as cash held by the central bank does not represent currency in circulation.
16. Deposits
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amortised cost
Non-interest-bearing 293 276 283 925 293 203 283 852
 Banks’ r
eserve accounts 165 113 151 508 165 113 151 508
 Other curr
ent accounts 4 474 3 872 4 474 3 872
 
SA government accounts 123 689 128 545 123 616 128 472
Interest-bearing 286 362 190 347 168 799 80 095
 Banks’ curr
ent accounts 168 799 80 095 168 799 80 095
 Call deposits 117 563 110 252 – – 
Total deposits 579 638 474 272 462 002 363 947
Maturity structure of deposits
On demand 414 525 322 764 296 889 212 439
W
ithin 1 month 165 113 151 508 165 113 151 508
Total deposits 579 638 474 272 462 002 363 947
Banks’ reserve accounts
Commercial banks are required to maintain a minimum cash reserve balance with the SARB into which they are able to deposit at 
least such amounts as may be necessary to comply with the SARB Act. The banks’ reserve accounts do not accrue interest. In 
addition, the commercial banks can utilise the cash reserve accounts to either fund short positions or deposit surplus funds. As 
at year-end, the balance was below the required minimum reserve balance by an amount of R200 million (2024: R1 billion). The 
commercial banks concerned are afforded an opportunity, subject to conditions as the Governor may determine, to comply with 
the relevant provision within a specified period.
SA government accounts
The IMF allocates SDRs to member countries based on the member’s IMF quota shares. SA government accounts is the allocation 
received on behalf of and payable to the SA government.
Call deposits
In terms of the current interest rate policies approved by the CPD Board, call deposits earn interest at the repo rate (2024: repo rate). 
The prevailing rate at year-end for call deposits was 7.5% (2024: 8.25%). Margin call deposits are held on behalf of participants of the 
Johannesburg Stock Exchange Bond Electronic Trading Platform. The SARB does not trade on the platform, but holds the deposits 
for participants of the platform. The margin call deposits earn interest at the repo rate (2024: repo rate). The prevailing rate at year-end 
for margin call deposits was 7.5% (2024: 8.25%).
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   151 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
17. For eign deposits
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Designated FVPL
Foreign deposits 88 338 101 224 88 338 101 224
Foreign deposits relate to cash placed with the SARB by subscribers of foreign currency bonds issued by the SA government. The 
deposits are managed by the SARB as part of the foreign exchange reserves portfolio until such time when these deposits are 
withdrawn by NT. Refer to note 29 for further detail on the analyses of the currency composition and maturity structure of these 
foreign deposits.
18. Other liabilities
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amortised cost
Financial liabilities
Accounts payable 1 177 1 477 135 140
Accruals 770 820 597 720
RCLF fees received in advance 109 113 109 113
LGS provision for loss claims 31 554 31 554
Margin call 122 170 – –
Other financial liabilities 545 220 542 217
Non-financial liabilities
Treasury SDR account 759 – 759 –
Other non-financial liabilities 22 378 8 3
Total other liabilities 3 535 3 732 2 181 1 747
Maturity structure of financial liabilities
Within 1 month 1 807 2 800 1 383 1 190
Between 1 and 12 months 947 – 31 –
More than 1 year – 554 – 554
Total financial liabilities 2 754 3 354 1 414 1 744
LGS provision for loss claims
LGS provision for loss claims represents the provision raised on the total of the margin entitlement and credit premium accounts that 
the SARB will be able to utilise to settle any losses incurred by commercial banks on the LGS (for further information refer to notes  
5 and 9).
Treasury SDR account
The net payable relates to interest earned on the IMF SDR holdings as well as interest charged on the IMF SDR allocations recognised 
by the SARB on behalf of the SA government. The net amount in the current financial year consists of a receivable of R68 billion and 
payable of R69 billion. Refer to note 6.5 for more details.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
152 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
19. Liquidity tier liability
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mi
2025
R mil
2024
R mi
Liquidity tier liability 18 660 – – –
Interest payable on liquidity tier liability 119 – – –
Total liquidity tier liability 18 779 – – –
Maturity structure of liquidity tier liability:
Within 1 month 119 – – –
More than 5 years   18 660 – – –
Total liquidity tier liability 18 779 – – –
The purpose of the liquidity fund contribution is to enable CODI to initially build up its fund base.
Member banks are required to maintain a minimum amount in the account of the DIF, based on their level of covered deposits for as 
long as they are licensed. 
The contribution amount is based on a percentage of total covered deposits, published by CODI on an annual basis. The liquidity fund 
contribution is rolled and adjusted monthly with changes in the member banks’ total covered deposits. During the current financial 
year, the prescribed liquidity fund contribution was 3% of covered deposits. 
The liquidity fund contribution is interest-bearing and the capital will be repaid to the member banks as CODI builds up sufficient funds 
in the DIF. This year, R269 million of the liability was repaid due to the deregistration of a member bank.
Interest on the liquidity tier liability is payable monthly to member banks at the repo rate. As at 31 March 2025, the repo rate 
was 7.5%. 
The SARB issued a guarantee to the member banks for the loan amounts provided to CODI in the form of the liquidity tier 
contributions. This guarantee was entered into at the same time as the liquidity tier contributions and is thus considered to be integral 
to these loans. Refer to note 33. 
20. Post-employment benefits
The SARB and SABN provide the following post-employment benefits to its employees:
GROUP SARB
Note(s)
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Amounts recognised in the statement  
of financial position
Post-employment medical benefits 20.1 2 715 2 610 2 497 2 403
Post-employment group life benefits 20.2 78 75 69 67
Total post-employment benefits 2 793 2 685 2 566 2 470
Maturity structure of post-employment benefits
Within 12 months 425 424 410 410
More than 12 months 2 368 2 261 2 156 2 060
Total post-employment benefits 2 793 2 685 2 566 2 470
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   153 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
20. Post-employment benefits continued
20.1 Post-employment medical benefits
Post -employment medical benefits ar e provided to retired staff in the form of subsidised medical aid premiums. This benefit has been 
closed to all new employees at the SARB since 1 September 2011 and the SABN since 2003. The liability reflected the accumulated 
post-employment medical benefit liability at 31 March 2025.
GROUP SARB
Note(s)
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Balance at the beginning of the year 2 610 2 583 2 403 2 386
Movement during the year:
Amount recognised in profit or loss 23.2 327 317 304 293
 Inter
est cost 301 290 280 268
 Service cost 26 27 24 25
Cash movements
Benefits paid (158) (151) (145) (139)
Amount r
ecognised in OCI (64) (139) (65) (137)
 Financial assumption gains 15 (76) 14 (68)
 Experience gains on liabilities (79) (63) (79) (69)
Balance at the end of the year 2 715 2 610 2 497 2 403
Post-employment gr
oup life benefits are provided to retired staff in the form of subsidised group life premiums. This benefit has been 
closed to all new employees at the SARB since 1 September 2017 and SABN since 1 October 2017. The liability reflected below 
represents the accumulated post-employment group life benefit liability at 31 March 2025.
20.2 Post-employment gr oup life benefits
GROUP SARB
Note(s)
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Balance at the beginning of the year 75 72 67 64
Movement during the year:
Amount recognised in profit or loss 23.2 10 10 8 9
 Inter
est cost 8 8 7 7
 Service cost 2 2 1 2
Cash movements
Benefits paid (6) (5) (5) (5)
Amount r
ecognised in OCI (1) (2) (1) (1)
 Financial assumption gains 1 (4) 1 (3)
 Experience (gains)/losses on liabilities (2) 2 (2) 2
Balance at the end of the year 78 75 69 67
20.3 Post-employment r etirement fund benefits
The Group has made provision for pension and provident plans covering substantially all employees. All employees are members of 
the retirement fund administered by the Group or are members of funds within the various industries in which they are employed. The 
assets of these plans are held in administered trust funds separate from the Group’s assets and the funds are governed by the 
Pension Funds Act 24 of 1956. 
Statutory actuarial valuations are performed triennially, with the 31 March 2024 valuation having found the fund to be in a sound 
financial position. Interim actuarial valuations are concluded annually (except in years where a statutory valuation is performed).
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
154 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
20. Post-employment benefits continued
20.3 Post-employment r etirement fund benefits continued
Where a surplus in the fund is calculated, it is for the benefit of the members, and accordingly no asset is recognised in the financial 
statements of the SARB. The retirement fund is regulated by the FSCA and is a single scheme which caters for active members, 
pensioners on a living annuity, pensioners on a life annuity, and pensioners from the former defined benefit fund.
Active members participate on a defined contribution basis. The market risk lies fully with the active members until retirement. On 
retirement, former employees can commute up to one-third of their share of funds. They may use the remaining funds to buy either a 
living annuity or a life annuity (or a combination of both) from the fund. They may also choose to transfer their share of funds to 
another registered retirement annuity. 
Living annuity pensioners bear the entire market risk on their funds; however, they also fully benefit from positive market returns.
The life pension quoted by the retirement fund is based on the amount of capital available to the employee, as well as marital status, 
gender and age. There are currently 1 280 life pensioners (2024: 1 253 life pensioners). Once quoted a life pension, the rules of the 
fund stipulate that it will not be reduced, and thus, although the pensioner bears the market risk with regard to the annual increase 
granted, the employer will contribute if there is a shortage in the pension account which supports maintaining pensions at their 
existing level. This is in effect the only uncovered ‘defined benefit’ element in the fund. The risk for the retirement fund, and ultimately 
the SARB, in meeting this defined benefit, is market risk and life expectancy. As the SARB is the sponsor of the fund, the full defined 
benefit liability resides within the SARB. An IAS 19: Employee Benefits (IAS 19) valuation of this defined benefit at 31 March 2025 was 
performed by an independent actuary, the result of which can be summarised as follows:
Note(s)
Present 
value of 
obligation
R mil
Fair value 
of plan 
assets
R mil
Unrecognised
due to
paragraph
 65 limit
R mil
Total
R mil
Group and SARB 2025
Balance at the beginning of the year 3 090 (3 342) 252 –
Movement during the year:
Amount recognised in profit or loss 23.2 360 (386) 30 4
 Service cost 1 2 – 3
 Inter
est cost/(income) 359 (388) 30 1
Cash movements (49) 49 – –
 Benefits paid/(r
eceived) (49) 49 – –
 Employer contributions r
eceived – – – –
Amount recognised in OCI (51) (154) 201 (4)
 Financial assumption gains (27) (154) 201 20
 Experience losses on liabilities (24) – – (24)
Balance at the end of the year 3 350 (3 833) 483 –
Group and SARB 2024
Balance at the beginning of the year 2 758 (2 994) 236 –
Movement during the year:
Amount r
ecognised in profit or loss 23.2 313 (339) 26 –
 Service cost 1 – – 1
 Inter
est cost/(income) 312 (339) 26 (1)
Cash movements 3 (5) – (2)
 Benefits (r
eceived)/paid 3 (3) – –
 Employer contributions r
eceived – (2) – (2)
Amount recognised in OCI 16 (4) (10) 2
 Financial assumption gains (43) (4) (10) (57)
 Experience gains on liabilities 59 – – 59
Balance at the end of the year 3 090 (3 342) 252 –
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   155 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
20. Post-employment benefits continued
20.3 Post-employment r etirement fund benefits continued
The assets and liabilities of the defined benefit fund, which has been closed to new members since 1 July 1995, were transferred to 
the retirement fund on 31 March 2011. At present, 119 pensioners (2024: 127 pensioners) qualify for the defined benefits. The 
benefits provided are based on the individual’s years of membership and salary levels. These benefits were provided from 
contributions made by employees and the employer, and income derived from assets of the plan. The actuarial risk in respect of 
current pension commitments has mainly been transferred to Sanlam, which has a credit rating of AA (Standard and Poor’s). No 
further financial disclosures are deemed necessary in respect of the defined benefit, as required by IAS 19. The actuarial liability as 
at 31 March 2025 amounted to R88 million (2024: R98 million), while the plan assets towards this liability amounted to R88 million 
(2024: R98 million).
Since inception in 1995, there has not been a shortage in the pension account for any given year. The most recent statutory valuation 
at 31 March 2024 found the fund to be fully funded, with the actuarial liability of pensions to be R3 billion (2021: R3 billion) with plan 
assets of R3 billion (2021: R3 billion). The trustees of the retirement fund and the management of the SARB do not foresee a statutory 
liability for the SARB in terms of these pensioners.
The plan assets were invested in the following different asset classes as at 31 March 2025 per the interim valuation:
Local equities 24%
Local property 2%
Local fixed interest 34%
Cash 6%
Foreign investments 26%
Other 8%
100%
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
156 SOUTH AFRIC AN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
20. Post-employment benefits continued
20.4 Key assumptions
Post-employment benefits
2025 2024
Discount rate (Post-employment group life and medical benefits) 12.00% 12.05%
Discount rate (Post-employment retirement fund benefits) 11.70% 11.70%
Medical inflation (Post-employment medical benefits) 7.50% 7.50%
Medical inflation (Post-employment group life benefits) 7.00% 7.00%
Net discount rate (Post-employment medical benefits) 4.19% 4.23%
Net discount rate (Post-employment group life benefits) 4.67% 4.72%
Salary inflation (Post-employment retirement fund benefits) 6.90% 6.90%
Salary inflation (Post-employment group life benefits) 7.00% 7.00%
Premium rate 0.50% 0.50%
Inflation rate 6.00% 6.00%
Early retirement rates
 
55 2.50% 2.50%
 
56 2.50% 2.50%
 
57 2.50% 2.50%
 
58 2.50% 2.50%
 
59 2.50% 2.50%
 
60 100% 2.50%
Normal retirement age 63 63
Pensioner mortality rates
 Active members SA 85
-90 Light SA 85-90 Light
 
Pensioners PA (90)
rated down by 
2 years with 
0.75% p.a.
improvement
PA (90)
rated down by
2 years with
 0.75% p.a.
improvement
Pension increase rate (Post-employment retirement fund benefits)
Category 1 and ex-pension 5.00% 5.90%
Category 2 3.75% 4.43%
Category 3 2.25% 2.66%
Valuation date 31 March 2025 31 March 2024
The key assumptions of the Group and the SARB are the same.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25                   157 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
20. Post-employment benefits continued
20.5 Sensitivity analysis
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
The effect of a 1% increase and decrease in the discount rate is as follows: 
Employers’ accrued liability
 1% decr
ease 3 322 3 492 3 070 3 252
 V
aluation basis 2 793 2 685 2 566 2 470
 1% incr
ease 1 762 1 907 1 556 1 714
Employers’ service and interest cost
 1% decr
ease 779 783 750 755
 V
aluation basis1 703 689 670 662
 1% incr
ease 680 672 652 646
The effect of a 1% increase and decrease in the medical inflation rate is as follows: 
Employers’ accrued liability
 1% decr
ease 1 771 1 905 1 566 1 711
 V
aluation basis 2 793 2 685 2 566 2 470
 1% incr
ease 3 280 3 067 3 028 2 827
Employers’ service and interest cost
 1% decr
ease 637 623 612 598
 V
aluation basis1 703 689 675 662
 1% incr
ease 843 770 811 740
The effect of a one year increase and decrease in the post-employment mortality rate is as follows: 
Employers’ accrued liability
 1 year downwar
d 3 049 3 212 2 817 2 992
 V
aluation basis 2 793 2 685 2 566 2 470
 1 year upwar
d 1 974 2 125 1 753 1 915
Employers’ service and interest cost
 1 year downwar
d 725 706 695 678
 V
aluation basis1 703 689 675 662
 1 year upwar
d 687 674 659 647
The effect of a 1% increase and decrease in the salary inflation rate is as follows:
Employers’ accrued liability
 1% decr
ease 2 052 2 183 1 825 1 969
 V
aluation basis 2 793 2 685 2 566 2 470
 1% incr
ease 2 943 2 730 2 716 2 514
Employers’ service and interest cost
 1% decr
ease 703 688 674 661
 V
aluation basis1 703 689 675 662
 1% incr
ease 704 690 675 663
The effect of a one year increase and decrease in the base pension increase rate is as follows:
Employers’ accrued liability
 1 year downwar
d 2 979 3 148 2 752 2 933
 V
aluation basis 2 793 2 685 2 566 2 470
 1 year upwar
d 2 045 2 189 1 818 1 974
Employers’ service and interest cost
 1 year downwar
d 673 659 644 632
 V
aluation basis1 703 689 675 662
 1 year upwar
d 808 799 779 772
1 For ecast service and interest costs for the year ending 2026.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025
158 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
21. Gold and Foreign Exchange Contingency Reserve Account 
GROUP SARB
Note(s)
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
SARB Act
Opening balance 531 989 458 714 531 989 458 714
Profit on gold price adjustment account1 61 617 27 606 61 617 27 606
Profit/(loss) on FEC adjustment account 6 225 (14 291) 6 225 (14 291)
(Loss)/profit on foreign exchange adjustment account (35 937) 59 915 (35 937) 59 915
Movement in unrealised gains/(losses) on FECs 72 (7) 72 (7)
563 966 531 937 563 966 531 937
Payments (to)/from the SA government (200 065) 52 (200 065) 52
Total GFECRA liability 363 901 531 989 363 901 531 989
Balance composition
Balance currently due to the SA government 363 829 531 895 363 829 531 895
Net unrealised gains on FECs 8 72 94 72 94
363 901 531 989 363 901 531 989
1  The gold price adjustment account includes the changes in gold statutory price as well as income and expenses relating to gold transactions.
The GFECRA, which is operated in terms of section 28 of the SARB Act, represents net gains and losses incurred on gold, foreign 
exchange transactions and forward exchange contracts which are for the account of the SA government. Settlement of this account is 
subject to agreement, from time to time, between the SARB and the SA government and consists mainly of the exchange margin. 
In June 2024, the SARB concluded a settlement framework agreement with the National Treasury for the settlement of the GFECRA 
liability. In terms of the agreement, the SARB will settle R250 billion of the GFECRA liability in instalments over the next 3 financial years. 
In the current financial year, R200 billion of this amount was settled and R50 billion will be settled over the next two financial years.  
Further settlement of the GFECRA liability may only occur if the SARB has an adequate contingency reserve level as well as an adequate 
estimated GFECRA balance level to absorb potential future currency reversals.
22. Share capital
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Issued
2 000 000 shares (2024: 2 000 000 shares) of R1 each 2 2 2 2
These shares qualify for a maximum dividend of 10 cents per share per annum.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              159 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
23. Profit before taxation
23.1 Operating and other income
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Administration and management fees – – 113 26
Bank charges 260 291 260 291
Commission on banking services 2 263 716 925 716
Rental income 8 65 6 6
Sales of bank notes and coin to third parties 2 337 2 193 – –
Sundry income 129 105 22 88
Total operating income 4 997 3 370 1 326 1 127
Other income1 100 000 – 100 000 –
Total operating and other income 104 997 3 370 101 326 1 127
1  To promote the policy solvency of the SARB, NT transferred R100 billion to the SARB in the current financial year. This was considered to be a separate transaction to the 
settlement of the GFECRA liability, with the amount being recognised as income.
160 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
23. Profit before taxation (continued)
23.2 Operating costs
GROUP SARB
Note(s)
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Depreciation and amortisation
Buildings 52 55 45 48
Computer software 698 297 692 291
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 354 492 233 335
Total depreciation and amortisation 12 & 13 1 104 844 970 674
Net loss/(profit) on disposal:
Property, plant and equipment and intangible assets 12 & 13 34 (4) 46 (4)
Impairment loss on:
Property, plant and equipment and intangible assets 12 & 13 3 325 3 325
Write-down of inventories
Write-down of inventories 7 9 25 – – 
Auditor’s remuneration – external
Audit fees 35 37 25 28
Consulting fees
Consulting fees1 431 387 404 363
Employee costs
Directors' remuneration 34.6 41 37 40 37
Remuneration and recurring staff costs 3 789 3 627 3 092 2 971
Contribution to funds – Normal 345 310 332 294
Contributions to funds – Additional – 3 – 3 
Movement in provision for post-employment  
medical benefits 20.1 327 317 304 293
Movement in provision for post-employment  
group life benefits 20.2 10 10 8 9
Movement in provision for post-employment  
retirement fund benefits 20.3 4 – 4 –
Premiums paid – Medical aid 155 144 140 129
Premiums paid – Group life 9 9 5 5
Total employee costs 4 680 4 457 3 925 3 741
Other
Cost of new currency 21 19 2 491 1 791
Manufacturing costs 2 742 2 468 – – 
IT infrastructure 791 579 734 547
Other operating costs2 2 041 1 424 1 060 983
Total operating expenses 11 891 10 561 9 658 8 448
1  Consulting fees include non-audit services by the external auditors of R592 058. 
2  Other operating costs comprise mainly business systems and technology costs, repairs and maintenance, building maintenance costs, travel and accommodation,  
and training expenses.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              161 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
24. Taxation
GROUP SARB
Note(s)
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
South African normal taxation
Current
Local income taxation – current period 6 861 4 488 6 810 4 380
Deferred
Current year timing differences 14 (142) (232) (157) (192)
Adjustment in respect of prior years 14 (5) 3 – –
Tax loss utilised – 1 113 – 1 113
Total taxation 6 714 5 372 6 653 5 301
% % % %
Reconciliation of taxation rate
South African normal taxation rate 27.00 27.00 27.00 27.00
Adjusted for: 
Disallowable expenses (0.36) 1.68 0.06 2.08
Donations 0.01 0.05 0.01 0.06
Dilution loss on investment in associate 0.07 – 0.07 –
Impairment on investment in associate – 1.35 – 1.45
Expenses of a capital nature (0.44) 0.28 (0.02) 0.57
Exempt income and special deductions (21.45) (1.30) (21.71) (0.10)
Capital gains tax – (0.02) (0.02) (0.10)
Other income1 (21.28) – (21.69) –
Special allowances2 (0.17) (1.28) – –
Prior years – 0.01 – –
Effective taxation rate 5.19 27.39 5.35 28.98
Taxation paid
Opening balance – taxation (payable)/receivable (22) 721 (58) 754
Current taxation for the year recognised in profit or loss (6 861) (4 488) (6 810) (4 380)
Interest accrued – 45 – 45
Closing balance – taxation payable 1 427 22 1 432 58
Taxation paid (5 456) (3 700) (5 436) (3 523)
1  Other exempt income relates to the R100 billion received from NT in the current financial year. Refer to Note 23.1.
2 Special allowances in Group mainly relate to the CPD and CODI, which are exempt from taxation.
162 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
25. Dividends paid
The SARB shares qualify for a maximum dividend of 10 cents per share per annum in terms of the SARB Act. A total dividend of  
10 cents per share, amounting to R200 000, was paid for the current financial year (2024: 200 000). The dividend was paid in two 
instalments of 5 cents per share, being the interim and final dividend, amounting to R100 000 each.
26. Net cash generated from operations
GROUP SARB
Note(s) 2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Reconciliation of profit before taxation to cash 
generated from operating activities
Profit before taxation for the year 126 953 19 626 124 475 18 293
Adjustments for:
Interest revenue (8 708) (10 697) (1 074) (1 298)
Interest expense 23 253 18 339 15 216 9 372
Fair value adjustments on investments 32 (110) (223) – –
Dividends received 32 & 34.3 (145) (112) (145) (112)
Depreciation, amortisation and impairment 12 & 13 1 107 1 169 973 999
Net profit/(loss) on disposal of fixed assets 23.2 34 (4) 46 (4)
Profit from associate 34.3 (71) (154) – –
Dilution loss on investment in associate 34.3 311 – 311 –
Impairment loss on investment in associate 34.3 – 982 – 982
Credit impairment reversal 29.2 (342) (337) – (8)
Unrealised foreign exchange gains – 1 – –
Post-employment benefits 20 173 171 162 159
Interest accrued on taxation 24 – (45) – (45)
Net cash generated from operating activities 142 455 28 716 139 964 28 338
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Amounts due by Group companies 34.4 – – 583 (770)
Accommodation to banks 3 98 1 947 98 1 947
Investments 4 23 324 17 892 – –
Other assets 5 465 5 388 648 5 378
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 (56 676) (85 706) (56 676) (85 706)
Inventories 7 63 (801) (1) (4)
FEC assets 8 40 65 40 65
Loans and advances 9 2 586 2 989 2 586 2 989
South African government bonds 10 (2 796) 1 822 (2 796) 1 822
Equity investment in BIS 11 195 (322) 195 (322)
Notes and coin in circulation 15 (1 733) (2 061) (1 733) (2 061)
Deposits 16 105 371 21 845 98 055 18 332
Amounts due to Group companies 34.4 – – 22 025 2 890
Foreign deposits 17 (12 886) (26 265) (12 886) (26 265)
Other liabilities 18 146 (5 891) 436 (6 202)
Liquidity tier liability 19 119 – – –
FEC liabilities 8 (18) (57) (18) (57)
GFECRA 21 (168 088) 73 274 (168 088) 73 274
Net cash generated from/(utilised by) changes 
in working capital (109 790) 4 119 (117 532) (14 690)
Net cash generated from operations 32 665 32 835 22 432 13 648
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              163 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
27. Capital commitments
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Already contracted for but not yet incurred
Buildings 869 1 443 761 1 440
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 377 231 161 199
Intangible assets 792 1 093 792 1 084
Total capital expenditure contracted for, but not yet 
incurred 2 038 2 767 1 714 2 723
Already approved for but not yet contracted for
Buildings 698 999 506 887
Plant, vehicles, furniture and equipment 1 812 778 1 331 302
Intangible assets 374 333 355 325
Total capital expenditure approved, but not yet 
contracted for 2 884 2 110 2 192 1 514
These capital commitments will be funded from internal resources.
28. Events after the reporting period
On 9 May 2025, the SARB signed a subscription agreement and a shareholders agreement to subscribe for 50% of the shares in 
BankservAfrica. The transaction is still subject to conditions precedent, including Competition Commission approval.
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments
 Introduction
The SARB is a risk-averse institution. Owing to the unique role and functions of the SARB, risk management is not solely based on 
risk and return considerations but also takes into account public interest in line with the statutory and constitutional responsibility of 
the SARB.
The SARB holds and manages the official reserves of South Africa in accordance with its role as a central bank and the SARB Act. 
The SARB is also responsible for achieving and maintaining price stability in the interest of sustainable and balanced economic 
development and growth through monetary policy.
The FMD of the SARB is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy and the management of the reserves.
Reserves management
Reserves play a key role in ensuring that the country will be able to:
• cover its external operational needs;
• service the country’s foreign exchange liabilities;
• cover any foreign currency net imbalances in the balance of payments; and
• maintain confidence in the country’s monetary and exchange rate policies.
164 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
Reserves management continued
Framework
The risk tolerance of the SARB, as far as reserves management operations are concerned, is specified and implemented through the 
Investment Policy (IP), the Strategic Asset Allocation (SAA), the active risk budget and the investment guidelines. The IP provides a 
strategic framework that guides FMD and the Reserves Management Committee (Resmanco) in their respective roles in the reserves 
management process. The IP specifies, among other things, the aggregate tolerance parameters of the SARB and the eligible asset 
classes, which are implemented through the SAA.
The SAA determines the optimal asset allocation, while recognising the risk tolerance and liquidity constraints of the SARB. It sets  
the tranche sizes, currency composition, appropriate asset classes and calculates the expected risk and return over the relevant  
time horizon. These parameters are specified at tranche level. Hence, each tranche has its own asset mix aimed at achieving the 
investment objectives of the tranche. The investment objectives in order of priority are:
• capital preservation;
• liquidity; and
• achieving reasonable returns.
Governance
The SARB has a three-tier governance structure where the responsibilities for executive authority, strategic management and the 
actual portfolio management are clearly segregated. This comprises of the GEC, Resmanco and FMD. The GEC is responsible for 
decision-making around the overall risk tolerance of the organisation, the IP and the SAA of reserves. The Resmanco is the 
investment committee which functions within the parameters defined by the GEC, and is responsible for decision-making around 
investment guidelines, the allocation of the active risk budget to individual portfolios and the appointment or removal of external fund 
managers and custodians.
Risk reporting is a formalised and clearly defined process within the SARB. A monthly risk report is compiled and distributed to senior 
management of the SARB, including the DGs, CIA and Group CFO. A quarterly risk management report, which focuses on the 
management of risks relating to foreign exchange reserves, is distributed to the Resmanco and the GEC. Moreover, a quarterly 
financial risk report is compiled and distributed to members of the SARB’s RMC and the BREC. The objective of these risk reports is 
to inform management of financial risk to which the SARB may be exposed, the possible impact on the key functions of the SARB, 
and how such risks are managed. The reports, furthermore, highlight future risks that might adversely impact the activities of the 
SARB. In line with international best practice, key risk types discussed in these reports are market, credit and operational risk in 
relation to market, monetary policy implementation and reserves management operations.
Risk governance policies and procedures are performed by heads of departments, managing directors of the subsidiaries, and the 
RMCD, with oversight by the RMC and BREC. Certain aspects of risk management specific to financial instruments are described 
below.
Daily operations
Reserves management activities are performed by FMD. These activities are in line with principles of sound internal governance which 
include that of portfolio management, performance measurement, risk control and compliance, accounting and settlement.
Statement of financial position impact
Key statement of financial position balances related to reserves management include:
Note 11 – Equity investment in BIS;
Note 6 – Gold and foreign exchange reserves; and 
Note 21 – GFECRA.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              165 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
Reserves management continued
Monetary policy
The task of implementing monetary policy decisions is undertaken through a range of refinancing operations conducted with the 
commercial banks as counterparties and which are executed at or with a spread to the repo (policy) rate. In addition to the 
refinancing operations, FMD also conducts a range of open market operations to influence the liquidity in the money market. Market 
operations are undertaken in both the domestic and foreign exchange markets. The open market operations include issuing SARB 
debentures, conducting reverse repos, transferring public sector funds between the market and the SARB and performing money 
market swaps in the foreign exchange market.
In addition to the main repo facility, the SARB offers a range of end-of-day facilities for the commercial banks to square off their daily 
positions on their settlement accounts. These include access to their cash reserve balances held with the SARB, supplementary 
repos/reverse repos conducted at the repo rate and an automated standing facility that automatically settles end-of-day balances on 
the banks' settlement accounts at a rate of 1% below or above the policy rate.
Framework
The framework for domestic market operations is specified in the Operational Notice.
Governance
The SARB has full operational autonomy. Monetary policy is set by the SARB’s MPC, which conducts monetary policy within a 
flexible inflation-targeting framework. This committee consists of seven members of the SARB: the Governor, three DGs and three 
senior officials of the SARB.
Daily operations
The Domestic Market Operations Section (within FMD) is responsible for conducting all domestic market operations associated with 
the SARB’s responsibility for monetary policy implementation. These operations include all activities related to providing and draining 
liquidity conducted with banking counterparties.
Statement of financial position impact 
Key statement of financial position balances related to monetary policy implementation include: 
Note 3 – Accommodation to banks and standing facilities;
Note 8 – FEC assets and liabilities; 
Note 15 – Notes and coin in circulation;
Note 16 – Banks’ reserve and current accounts; 
Note 16 – SA government special deposit; 
Note 17 – Foreign deposits; and
Note 19 – Liquidity tier liability. 
166 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk
Market risk monitoring is conducted at all levels , such as the Portfolio and Tranche level, with continual with constant tracking of the 
risk metrics , including duration, ‘Value at Risk’ and ‘Tracking Error’. Portfolio holdings data is consolidated and stress testing and 
scenario analyses are conducted in the portfolios to ensure that risk exposures remain within the approved risk tolerance levels should 
extreme market movements occur. In the event that the risk metrics deviate significantly from the approved levels, recommendations 
to review or amend the necessary allocations may be escalated to Resmanco. Market risk is reported on a daily, monthly and 
quarterly basis.
29.1.1 Interest rate risk
With the exception of SA government bonds and amounts due by/to related parties, the rand-denominated financial assets and 
liabilities of the SARB respectively earn and bear interest at rates linked to South African money market rates. The level of these rates 
is closely linked to the SARB’s repo rate, which is set by the MPC. The repricing of these assets and liabilities therefore occurs at 
approximately the same time as changes to the repo rate are announced by the MPC.
The SARB is exposed to interest rate risk in respect of its foreign investments. The risk tolerance and return expectations in respect of 
these financial instruments are embodied in the SAA, which is approved by the GEC. The risk budget is approved by the GEC.
29.1.2 Price risk
Assets used as collateral (refer to note 3) are subject to a daily mark-to-market valuation. To protect the SARB against credit and 
market risk, participants in the repo agreement transactions have to provide securities representing market values in excess of the 
exposures (‘haircut valuations’). The ‘haircut’ is the extent to which the collateral must exceed the value of the underlying loan (e.g. 
102%). The excess collateral value is to protect against the risk embedded in the assets used as collateral. Treasury bills are valued at 
the most recent auction’s discount rates.
29.1.3 Currency risk
Foreign exchange operations
The framework of control regarding market operations in foreign exchange, (i.e. in spot and forward foreign exchange transactions) is 
rigorous. Trading limits exist for these instruments and compliance is monitored and reported daily. Foreign exchange risk is managed 
by approving certain currencies for the foreign exchange reserve portfolios to diversify this risk. The gains and losses resulting from 
active risk positions are recorded in the SARB’s statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income. Gains and losses arising 
from movements in the exchange rate of the rand are recorded in GFECRA in the SARB’s statement of financial position. The SARB’s 
exposure to currency risk from holding reserves is thus limited by the fact that, in terms of the SARB Act, all profits or losses on gold, 
foreign exchange adjustments on assets and liabilities, and on any current or future FEC shall be for the account of the SA 
government.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              167 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk continued 
29.1.3 Currency risk continued
Concentration risk 
Concentration risk is the risk of significant exposure to a single counterparty or geographic region. Concentration risk is calculated on the basis of a percentage of the 
exposure to the counterparty of the SARB as a percentage of total exposures to all counterparties. This is actively monitored by the Risk Management Unit (within 
FMD). The concentration risk can be analysed as follows:
South African 
rand Gold
United States 
dollar Euro Pound sterling Chinese yuan Other Total
R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil %
Group 2025 
Financial assets
Amortised cost
Cash and cash 
equivalents 90 021 100 – - 18 – 14 – – – – – – – 90 053 100
Accommodation to 
banks 353 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 353 100
Investments 82 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 82 100
Other financial assets 1 565 98.5 – – 19 1.2 5 0.3 – – – – – – 1 589 100
Loans and advances 4 494 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 4 494 100
Investments 343 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 343 100
FVPL
SA government bonds 34 803 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 34 803 100
FVOCI
Equity investment in BIS – – – – – – – – – – – – 7 184 100 7 184 100
SARB Act
FEC assets – – – – 78 100 – – – – – – – – 78 100
Gold and foreign 
exchange1 – – 231 195 18.7 678 135 54.9 41 522 3.4 34 307 2.8 74 843 6.0 175 699 14.2 1 235 701 100
Total financial assets 131 661 9.6 231 195 16.9 678 250 49.3 41 541 3.0 34 307 2.5 74 843 5.4 182 883 13.3 1 374 680 100
Unrecognised 
financial assets
Guarantees 3 398 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 3 398 100
Total unrecognised 
financial assets 3 398 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 3 398 100
1 Included in the 'Other' category is R124 522 million for amounts denominated in XDR.
168 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk continued 
29.1.3 Currency risk continued
Concentration risk continued
South African 
rand Gold
United States 
dollar Euro
Pound 
sterling Chinese yuan Other Total
R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil %
Group 2025 
Financial
liabilities 
Amortised cost
Notes and coin in 
circulation 167 771 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 167 771 100
Deposits 579 638 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 579 638 100
Other financial liabilities 2 651 96.3 – – 48 1.7 55 2.0 – – – – – – 2 754 100
Liquidity tier liabilities  18 779 100 – –  –  –  –  –  – –  – –  – – 18 779  100
FVPL
Foreign deposits – – – – 69 711 78.9 9 666 10.9 4 684 5.3 2 090 2.4 2 187 2.5 88 338 100
SARB Act
FEC liabilities – – – – 6 100 – – – – – – – – 6 100
GFECRA 363 901 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 363 901 100
Total financial liabilities 1 132 740 92.8 – – 69 765 5.7 9 721 0.8 4 684 0.4 2 090 0.2 2 187 0.2 1 221 187 100
Unrecognised financial 
liabilities
Guarantees 3 398 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 3 398 100
Loan commitments 119 421 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 119 421 100
Total unrecognised 
financial liabilities 122 819 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 122 819 100
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              169 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk continued 
29.1.3 Currency risk continued
Concentration risk continued
South African 
rand Gold
United States 
dollar Euro Pound sterling Chinese yuan Other Total
R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil %
Group 2024 
Financial assets
Amortised cost
Cash and cash equivalents 61 574 99.7 – – 142 0.2 27 – – – – – – – 61 743 100
Accommodation to banks 451 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 451 100
Investments 23 285 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 23 285 100
Other financial assets 1 662 98.6 – – 19 1.1 5 0.3 – – – – – – 1 686 100
Loans and advances 7 080 100 – – – – – – – – – – – –  7 080 100
FVPL
Investments 351 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 351 100
SA government bonds 32 007 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 32 007 100
FVOCI
Equity investment in BIS – – – – – – – – – – – – 6 605 100  6 605 100
SARB Act
FEC assets – – – – 118 100 – – – – – – – –  118 100
Gold and foreign exchange – – 169 535 14.4 684 092 58.0 38 380 3.3 33 171 2.8 73 207 6.2 180 640 15.3 1 179 025 100
Total financial assets 126 411 9.6 169 535 12.9 684 371 52.1 38 412 2.9 33 171 2.5 73 207 5.6 187 245 14.3 1 312 351 100
Unrecognised  
financial assets
Guarantees 6 382 100 – – – – – – – – – – – –  6 382 100
Total unrecognised 
financial assets 6 382 100 – – – – – – – – – – – –  6 382 100
170 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk continued 
29.1.3 Currency risk continued
Concentration risk continued
South African 
rand Gold
United States 
dollar Euro Pound sterling Chinese yuan Other Total
R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil %
Group 2024 
Financial liabilities 
Amortised cost
Notes and coin in 
circulation 169 504 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 169 504 100
Deposits 474 272 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 474 272 100
Other financial liabilities 2 400 71.5 – – 945 28.2 9 0.3 – – – – – – 3 354 100
FVPL
Foreign deposits – – – – 82 632 81.6 9 676 9.6 4 534 4.5 2 113 2.1 2 269 2.2 101 224 100
SARB Act
FEC liabilities – – – – 24 100 – – – – – – – – 24 100
GFECRA 531 989 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 531 989 100
Total financial liabilities 1 178 165 90.8 – – 83 601 6.5 9 685 0.8 4 534 0.4 2 113 0.2 2 269 0.2 1 280 367 100
Unrecognised financial 
liabilities
Guarantees 6 382 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 6 382 100
Loan commitments 117 739 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 117 739 100
Total unrecognised 
financial liabilities 124 121 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 124 121 100
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              171 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk continued 
29.1.3 Currency risk continued
Concentration risk continued
South African 
rand Gold
United States 
dollar Euro Pound sterling Chinese yuan Other Total
R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil %
SARB 2025
Financial assets
Amortised cost
Amounts due by  
group companies 194 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 194 100
Accommodation to banks 353 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 353 100
Other financial assets 1 252 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 1 252 100
Loans and advances 4 494 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 4 494 100
FVPL
SA government bonds 34 803 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 34 803 100
FVOCI
Equity investment in BIS – – – – – – – – – – – – 7 184 100 7 184 100
SARB Act
FEC assets – – – – 78 100 – – – – – – – – 78 100
Gold and foreign exchange1 – – 231 195 18.7 678 135 54.9 41 522 3.4 34 307 2.8 74 843 6.1 175 699 14.1 1 235 701 100
Total financial assets 41 096 3.2 231 195 18.0 678 213 52.9 41 522 3.3 34 307 2.7 74 843 5.7 182 883 14.2 1 284 059 100
Unrecognised financial 
assets
Guarantees 3 398 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 3 398 100
Total unrecognised 
financial assets 3 398 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 3 398 100
1 Included in the 'Other' category is R124 522 million for amounts denominated in XDR.
172 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk continued 
29.1.3 Currency risk continued
Concentration risk continued
South African 
rand Gold
United States 
dollar Euro Pound sterling Chinese yuan Other Total
R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil %
SARB 2025
Financial liabilities 
Amortised cost
Notes and coin in 
circulation 167 771 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 167 771 100
Deposits 462 002 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 462 002 100
Amounts due to Group 
companies 50 328 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 50 328 100
Other financial liabilities 1 414 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 1 414 100
FVPL
Foreign deposits – – – – 69 711 79 9 666 11 4 684 5.3 2 090 2.4 2 187 2.5 88 338 100
SARB Act
FEC liabilities – – – – 6 100 – – – – – – – – 6 100
GFECRA 363 901 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 363 901 100
Total financial liabilities 1 045 416 92 – – 69 717 6.1 9 666 0.9 4 684 0.4 2 090 0.2 2 187 0.2 1 133 760 100
Unrecognised financial 
liabilities
Guarantees 22 177 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 22 177 100
Loan commitments 21 295 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 21 295 100
Total unrecognised 
financial liabilities 43 472 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 43 472 100
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              173 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk continued 
29.1.3 Currency risk continued
Concentration risk continued
South African 
rand Gold
United States 
dollar Euro Pound sterling Chinese yuan Other Total
R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil %
SARB 2024
Financial assets
Amortised cost
Amounts due by Group 
companies 777 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 777 100
Accommodation to banks 451 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 451 100
Other financial assets 1 579 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 1 579 100
Loans and advances 7 080 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 7 080 100
FVPL
SA government bonds 32 007 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 32 007 100
FVOCI
Equity investment in BIS – – – – – – – – – – – – 6 605 100 6 605 100
SARB Act
FEC assets – – – – 118 100 – – – – – – – – 118 100
Gold and foreign exchange1 – – 169 535 13.0 684 092 58.4 38 380 3.9 33 171 2.7 73 207 6.4 180 640 15.6 1 179 025 100
Total financial assets 41 894 3.4 169 535 12.4 684 210 55.7 38 380 3.1 33 171 2.7 73 207 6.0 187 245 15.3 1 227 642 100
Unrecognised  
financial assets
Guarantees 6 382 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 6 382 100
Total unrecognised 
financial assets 6 382 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 6 382 100
1 Included in the 'Other' category is R127 186 million for amounts denominated in XDR.
174 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.1 Market risk continued 
29.1.3 Currency risk continued
Concentration risk continued
South African 
rand Gold
United States 
dollar Euro Pound sterling Chinese yuan Other Total
R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil % R mil %
SARB 2024
Financial liabilities 
Amortised cost
Notes and coin in circulation 169 504 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 169 504 100
Deposits 363 947 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 363 947 100
Amounts due to Group 
companies 28 303 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 28 303 100
Other financial liabilities 1 744 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 1 744 100
FVPL
Foreign deposits – – – – 82 632 81.6 9 676 9.6 4 534 4.5 2 113 2.1 2 269 2.2 101 224 100
SARB Act
FEC liabilities – – – – 24 100 – – – – – – – – 24 100
GFECRA 531 989 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 531 989 100
Total financial liabilities 1 095 487 89 – – 82 656 7 9 676 0.8 4 534 0.4 2 113 0.2 2 269 0.2 1 196 735 100
Unrecognised financial 
liabilities
Guarantees 6 382 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 6 382 100
Loan commitments 26 600 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 26 600 100
Total unrecognised financial 
liabilities 32 982 100 – – – – – – – – – – – – 32 982 100
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              175 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.2 Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk of loss due to the inability or unwillingness of a counterparty to meet its contractual obligations. Credit risk arises 
from activities of the Group such as cash and cash equivalents, accommodation to banks, loans and advances, loan commitments 
arising from such lending activities, and other financial assets such as trade receivables, but can also arise from credit enhancement 
provided, such as financial guarantees. The Group is also exposed to other credit risks arising from investments in debt securities and 
other exposures arising from its trading activities, including non-equity trading portfolio assets and derivatives as well as settlement 
balances with market counterparties and reverse repo agreements.
A prudent approach to credit risk management is adopted through limiting investment activities to high credit quality assets and 
counterparties by setting minimum credit rating requirements and requesting appropriate collateral. Credit risk is largely managed by 
specifying concentration and holding limits per asset class, counterparty or issuer type and credit rating category in the investment 
guidelines. The SARB mitigates concentration risk through diversification and investing in accordance with the prescriptions of the 
investment guidelines. This excludes government-owned entities and guaranteed securities of highly rated countries. Exposure to 
these entities are usually unlimited as credit risk is perceived to be minimal. Furthermore, minimum collateral requirements and netting-
off arrangements with certain counterparties and securities lending agents are in place, usually through the Master International 
Swaps and Derivatives Association agreements. In addition, the use of exchange traded derivatives, legally segregated custodial and 
securities lending accounts and indemnity arrangements further mitigate counterparty pre-settlement, settlement and replacement 
risks. Credit risk is reported on a daily, monthly and quarterly basis.
Credit risk exposure monitoring is conducted at all levels, such as the Portfolio and Issuer level. Portfolio holdings data is consolidated 
and exposure concentration is monitored at counterparty, asset class, issuer type and credit rating category levels. Through constant 
monitoring of market information, together with in-depth financial statement analysis of counterparties, where necessary, the 
appropriate recommendations to review or amend credit and concentration limits are escalated to Resmanco and the GEC.
29.2.1 Credit risk measurement
The estimation of credit exposure for risk management purposes is complex and requires the use of models, as the exposure varies 
with changes in market conditions, expected cash flows and the passage of time. The assessment of credit risk of a portfolio of assets 
entails further estimations as to the likelihood of defaults occurring, of the associated loss ratios and of default correlations. The Group 
measures credit risk using PD, EAD and LGD for financial assets classified as at amortised cost. This is similar to the approach used 
for the purposes of measuring ECL under IFRS 9. Refer to note 29.2.2 for more details.
The Group uses external credit risk gradings that reflect its assessment of the PD of individual counterparties. The Group uses rating 
models tailored to the various categories of counterparties. Borrower and loan specific information collected at the time of application 
(such as level of collateral) is fed into this rating model. This is supplemented with external data such as credit bureau scoring 
information on individual borrowers. In addition, the models enable judgement to be fed into the final internal credit rating for each 
exposure. This allows for considerations which may not be captured as part of the other data inputs into the model. The credit grades 
are calibrated such that the risk of default increases exponentially at each higher risk grade. For example, this means that the 
difference in the PD between an A and A- rating grade is lower than the difference in the PD between a B and B- rating grade.
The following are additional considerations for each type of portfolio held by the Group:
• For debt securities in accommodation to banks, short-term deposits and loans and advances, external rating agency credit 
grades are used. These published grades are continuously monitored and updated. The PDs associated with each grade are 
determined based on realised default rates over the prior 12 months, as published by the rating agency.
• The Group’s rating method comprises 25 rating levels for instruments not in default (1 to 25) and five default classes (26 to 30).  
The master scale assigns each rating category a specified range of probabilities of default, which is stable over time. The rating 
methods are subject to an annual validation and recalibration so that they reflect the latest projections in the light of all actually 
observed defaults.
176 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.2 Credit risk continued 
The instruments relating to the foreign exchange reserves and equity investment in BIS are summarised below:
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
AAA 86 282 124 829 86 282 124 829
AA 263 242 275 742 263 242 275 742
A 75 282 72 962 75 282 72 962
A-1 586 884 542 562 586 884 542 562
Total foreign financial assets 1 011 690 1 016 095 1 011 690 1 016 095
29.2.2 ECL measurement
The key judgements and assumptions adopted by the Group for the measurement of ECL are discussed below:
29.2.2.1 Significant increase in credit risk
The Group considers a financial instrument to have experienced a SICR when one or more of the following quantitative, qualitative  
or backstop criteria have been met:
Quantitative criteria:
The SARB uses credit ratings to determine the SICR. The movement of an asset’s credit rating to the next lower rating of the credit 
rating scale is defined as a one-notch rating movement (i.e. moving from A+ to A). The SICR for the SARB is defined as a rating 
change of more than two notches as this change is guaranteed to move the asset to the next rating category or risk profile. Therefore  
a three-notch rating movement will always guarantee a movement of a financial asset to the next rating category (i.e. (i) upper medium 
grade to lower medium grade; (ii) non-investment grade to highly speculative grade; and (iii) substantial risks to extremely speculative), 
which according to the rating scale is of lower credit worthiness and this is applicable in all grades of the credit rating scale.  
The short-term nature of exposure makes it unlikely that credit risk will move significantly. This, however, is reviewed frequently.
SICR is considered before contractual payments are more than 30 days past due, and thus the rebuttable presumption that the credit 
risk on a financial asset has increased significantly since initial recognition when contractual payments are more than  
30 days past due does not apply. When the borrower is more than 30 days past due on its contractual payments, it is considered 
credit-impaired.
If the borrower is on the watch list and/or the instrument meets one or more of the following criteria:
• Negative outlook by two or more rating agencies in the past six months.
• Significant adverse changes in business, financial and/or economic conditions in which the borrower operates.
• Actual or expected forbearance or restructuring.
• Actual or expected significant adverse change in operating results of the borrower.
• Significant change in collateral value (secured facilities only) which is expected to increase risk of default.
• Early signs of cash flow/liquidity problems such as delay in servicing of trade creditors/loans.
The Group has not used the low credit risk exemption for any financial instruments in the year ended 31 March 2025 (2024: none). 
The CPD did not use the low credit risk exemption for any financial instruments in the year ended 31 March 2025 (2024: none).
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              177 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.2 Credit risk continued 
29.2.2 ECL measurement continued 
29.2.2.2 Definition of default and credit-impaired assets
The Group defines a financial instrument as in default, which is fully aligned with the definition of credit-impaired, when it meets one or 
more of the following criteria:
Quantitative criteria:
The borrower is more than 30 days past due on its contractual payments.
Qualitative criteria:
The borrower meets unlikeliness to pay criteria, which indicates the borrower is in significant financial difficulty. These are instances 
where:
• The borrower is in long-term forbearance.
• The borrower is in breach of financial covenant(s) if applicable.
• It is becoming probable that the borrower will enter bankruptcy.
• Financial assets are purchased or originated at a deep discount that reflects the incurred credit losses.
• An active market for that financial asset has disappeared.
The criteria above have been applied to all financial instruments held by the Group and are consistent with the definition of default used 
for internal credit risk management purposes. The default definition has been applied consistently to model the PD, EAD and LGD 
throughout the Group’s expected loss calculations.
An instrument is considered to no longer be in default (i.e. to have cured) when it no longer meets any of the default criteria for a 
consecutive period of three months. This period of three months has been determined based on an analysis which considers the 
likelihood of a financial instrument returning to default status after cure using different possible cure definitions.
178 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.2 Credit risk continued
29.2.2 ECL measurement continued
29.2.2.3 Measuring ECL – Explanation of inputs, assumptions and estimation techniques
The ECL is measured on either a 12-month (12M) or Lifetime basis depending on whether a SICR has occurred since initial 
recognition or whether an asset is considered to be credit-impaired. The general formulation of the ECL determination under the 
components-based approach (i.e. a model based on PD, EAD and LGD) requires the derivation of term-structured PD, EAD and LGD 
parameters as well as original effective interest rate for discounting. ECL calculations using this approach are based on the following 
components:
• PD – This is an estimate of the likelihood of default over a given time horizon.
• EAD – This is an estimate of the exposure at a future default date, taking into account expected changes in the exposure after the 
reporting date, including repayments of principal and interest, and expected drawdowns on committed facilities.
• LGD – This is an estimate of the loss arising on default. It is based on the difference between the contractual cash flows due and 
those that the lender would expect to receive, including from any collateral. It is usually expressed as a percentage of the EAD.
• Period of exposure – This is the expected period of exposure to credit risk not mitigated by risk management actions for 
instruments which include both drawn and undrawn parts.
• Discount rate – This is used to discount the expected loss to a present value at the reporting date using the effective interest rate 
(EIR) at initial recognition. The EIR is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts through the 
expected life of the financial asset or financial liability to the gross carrying amount of a financial asset or to the amortised cost of a 
financial liability.
The 12M and Lifetime EADs are determined based on the expected payment profile, which varies by instrument.
• For amortising products and bullet repayment loans, this is based on the contractual repayments owed by the borrower over a 12M 
or Lifetime basis. The 12M and Lifetime LGDs are determined based on the factors which impact the recoveries made post default. 
These vary by product type.
• For secured products, this is primarily based on collateral type and projected collateral values, historical discounts to market/book 
values due to forced sales, time to repossession and recovery costs observed.
• For unsecured products, LGDs are typically set at product level due to the limited differentiation in recoveries achieved across 
different borrowers.
Forward-looking economic information is also included in determining the 12M and Lifetime PD, EAD and LGD. Refer to note 29.2.2.4 
for an explanation of forward-looking information and its inclusion in ECL calculations.
The assumptions underlying the ECL calculation, such as how the maturity profile of the PDs and how collateral values change, are 
monitored and reviewed periodically.
There have been no significant changes in estimation techniques or assumptions used during the reporting period (2024: none).
29.2.2.4 Forward-looking information incorporated in the ECL models
Forward-looking information is incorporated into each of the model’s scenarios, (i.e. the base, upside and downside scenarios).
Periodically, stress testing is carried out of more extreme shocks to calibrate its determination of the upside and downside 
representative scenarios. A comprehensive review is performed at least annually on the design of the scenarios by a panel of experts 
that advises senior management.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              179 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.2 Credit risk continued
29.2.3 Credit risk exposure
29.2.3.1 Financial instruments subject to impairment
The closing balance of the expected credit loss allowance as at 31 March is reconciled as follows:
GROUP SARB
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Opening loss allowance as at 31 March (354) (691) – (8)
Loss allowance recognised during the year (12) – – –
Loss allowance reversed during the year 354 337 – 8
Loss allowance as at 31 March (12) (354) – –
Stage 1
12-months
ECL
R mil
Stage 2
Lifetime
ECL
R mil
Stage 3
Lifetime
ECL
R mil
Purchased
credit
impaired
R mil
Total
R mil
GROUP 2025
ECL opening balance – (354) – – (354)
Loss allowance (12) – – – (12)
Loss allowance reversed – 354 – – 354
ECL closing balance (12) – – – (12)
GROUP 2024
ECL opening balance – (691) – – (691)
Loss allowance reversed – 337 – – 337
ECL closing balance – (354) – – (354)
SARB 2025
ECL opening balance – – – – –
ECL closing balance – – – – –
SARB 2024
ECL opening balance – (8) – – (8)
Loss allowance reversed – 8 – – 8
ECL closing balance – – – – –
The Group writes off financial assets when it has exhausted all practical recovery efforts and has concluded that there is no 
reasonable expectation of recovery. Indicators thereof include ceasing enforcement activity or where the collateral value indicates  
that there is no reasonable expectation of recovery.
180 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.2 Credit risk continued
29.2.3 Credit risk exposure continued
29.2.3.2 Collateral and other credit enhancements
The Group employs a range of policies and practices to mitigate credit risk. The most common of these is accepting collateral for 
funds advanced. The Group has internal policies on the acceptability of specific classes of collateral or credit risk mitigation.
Credit risk with respect to monetary policy operations is sufficiently mitigated, since all repo transactions are fully collateralised. In 
terms of the SARB Act, no unsecured lending is allowed with the exception of loans made to the SA government, subsidiaries of the 
SARB and certain staff loans. The list of eligible securities is specified in the Operational Notice published on the SARB’s website. 
Furthermore, operations in the foreign exchange market can only be conducted with Authorised Dealers.
The minimum counterparty credit rating for placing deposits and investing in SA government bonds is ‘A’ by Standard & Poor’s  
or its Moody’s or Fitch rating equivalents, while the minimum rating for investments in corporate bonds is ‘AA-’.
There were no investment securities with a credit rating below the SARB’s investment guidelines as at 31 March 2025 (2024: none).
The Group’s policies regarding obtaining collateral have not significantly changed during the reporting period, excluding certain 
counterparty bills that the SARB has taken a decision to temporarily suspend as eligible collateral in its repo operations. There has 
been no significant change in the overall quality of the collateral held by the Group since the prior period.
29.2.4 Loss allowance
The loss allowance recognised in the period is impacted by a variety of factors, as described below:
• Impact on the measurement of ECL due to changes in PDs, EADs and LGDs in the period, arising from regular review of inputs.
• Impacts on the measurement of ECL due to changes made to models and assumptions such as the estimated term of  
the facility.
• Impact of updated legal agreements on the Inter-Governmental Cash Co-ordination (IGCC) facility–refer to note 9.
As at 31 March 2025 the Group recognised a loss allowance reversal of R354 million (2024: R337 million loss allowance); SARB loss 
allowance reversal of Rnil (2024: R8 million).
29.3 Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that an entity may not be able to accommodate decreases in liabilities or fund increases in assets in full at the 
time that a commitment or transaction is due for settlement. In the case of the SARB, this risk is not relevant to domestic assets and 
liabilities because of the SARB’s ability to create rands when required. However, the SARB does face liquidity risk in respect of foreign 
assets and liabilities. The SARB manages its foreign liquidity risks through appropriate structuring of its foreign investment portfolios to 
ensure that the maturity profiles of foreign assets adequately match those of foreign commitments. This is monitored and managed on 
a daily basis by the FMD. In addition, liquidity risk is managed by setting requirements that ensure minimum standards of liquidity, 
which may include minimum issue size thresholds and securities must be liquid enough to ensure that they are sellable within a 
reasonably short period. Moreover, the SARB’s reserve portfolios are constructed in such a way as to ensure that the ‘Liquidity 
Tranche’ is invested in relatively short-term securities to ensure that sufficient funds are available to meet obligations.
There are no other assets that are specifically used to manage liquidity risk.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              181 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.3 Liquidity risk continued
The table below analyses the financial liabilities into relevant maturity groupings based on the undiscounted contractual cash flows for 
the remaining period at the reporting date to contractual maturity date.
On demand 
or agreement
R mil
Up to 
1 month
R mil
1–3 
months
R mil
4–6 
months
R mil
7–12 
months
R mil
1–5
years
R mil
More than 
5 years
R mil
Total
R mil
GROUP 2025
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 167 771 – – – – – – 167 771
Deposits 414 525 165 113 – – – – – 579 638
Foreign deposits 48 88 290 – – – – – 88 338
Other financial liabilities – – 2 584 90 80 – – 2 754
Liquidity tier liability – 119 – – – – 35 776 35 895
FEC liabilities – – 6 – – – – 6
GFECRA1 313 901 – – – – 50 000 – 363 901
Total financial liabilities 896 245 253 522 2 590 90 80 50 000 35 776 1 238 303
Unrecognised financial liabilities
Guarantees 3 398 – – – – – – 3 398
Loan commitments 119 421 – – – – – – 119 421
Total unrecognised financial liabilities 122 819 – – – – – – 122 819
GROUP 2024
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 169 504 – – – – – – 169 504
Deposits 322 764 151 508 – – – – – 474 272
Foreign deposits 45 101 179 – – – – – 101 224
Other financial liabilities – 1 627 1 003 90 80 554 – 3 354
FEC liabilities – 14 2 8 – – – 24
GFECRA 531 989 – – – – – – 531 989
Total financial liabilities 1 024 302 254 328 1 005 98 80 554 – 1 280 367
Unrecognised financial liabilities
Guarantees 6 382 – – – – – – 6 382
Loan commitments 117 739 – – – – – – 117 739
Total unrecognised financial liabilities 124 121 – – – – – – 124 121
1 The repayment of the GFECRA liability is subject to certain conditions being met and agreement by the SARB and the SA government. Refer to Note 21.
182 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.3 Liquidity risk continued
On demand
or agreement
R mil
Up to 
1 month
R mil
1–3 
months
R mil
4–12 
months
R mil
1–5
years
R mil
More than 
5 years
R mil
Total
R mill
SARB 2025
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 167 771 – – – – –  167 771 
Deposits 296 889 165 113 – – – –  462 002
Amounts due to Group companies 50 328 – – – – –  50 328 
Foreign deposits 48 88 290 – – – –  88 338 
Other financial liabilities – 1 383 – 31 – – 1 414
FEC liabilities – – 6 – – –  6 
GFECRA1 313 901 – – – 50 000 –  363 901 
Total financial liabilities 828 937 254 786 6 31 50 000 – 1 133 760
Unrecognised financial liabilities
Guarantees 22 177 – – – – –  22 177 
Loan commitments 21 295 – – – – –  21 295 
Total unrecognised financial 
liabilities 43 472 – – – – –  43 472 
SARB 2024
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 169 504 – – – – –  169 504 
Deposits 212 439 151 508 – – – –  363 947
Amounts due to Group companies 28 303 – – – – –  28 303 
Foreign deposits 45 101 179 – – – –  101 224 
Other financial liabilities – 1 190 – – 554 – 1 744
FEC liabilities – 14 2 8 – –  24 
GFECRA 531 989 – – – – –  531 989 
Total financial liabilities 942 280 253 891 2 8 554 – 1 196 735
Unrecognised financial liabilities
Guarantees 6 382 – – – – –  6 382 
Loan commitments 26 600 – – – – –  26 600 
Total unrecognised financial 
liabilities 32 982 – – – – –  32 982 
1 The repayment of the GFECRA liability is subject to certain conditions being met and agreement by the SARB and the SA government. Refer to Note 21.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              183 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
29. Risk management in respect of financial instruments continued
29.4 Settlement risk
Settlement risk (the risk that the counterparty may not be able to complete a transaction) is mitigated in a number of ways. The SARB 
will only transfer funds after sufficient collateral has been secured.
For outright transactions in securities, settlement risk is eliminated through the use of systems that are based on delivery versus 
payment (i.e. the simultaneous exchange of securities and cash). In addition to restricting foreign exchange transactions to highly 
rated counterparties, a transaction limit is imposed on the total value of foreign currency transactions settling with a counterparty on a 
given day. Furthermore, the SARB is a participant in Continuous Linked Settlement, a clearing house that eliminates settlement risk in 
foreign exchange, allowing payment versus delivery in a number of major currencies. It eliminates ‘temporal’ settlement risk, making 
same-day settlement both possible and final.
184 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
30. Classification of financial assets and liabilities
Note(s)
Fair value
through other
comprehensive
income
R mil
SARB
Act 
R mil
 Fair value
through profit
or loss –
Mandatory
R mil
Fair value
through profit
or loss –
Designated
R mil
Amortised
cost
R mil
Total1 
R mil
GROUP 2025
Financial assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 2 – – – – 90 053 90 053
Accommodation to banks 3 – – – – 353 353
Investments 4 – – – – 425 425
Other financial assets 5 – – – – 1 589 1 589
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 – 355 716 879 985 – – 1 235 701
FEC assets 8 – 78 – – – 78
Loans and advances 9 – – – – 4 494 4 494
SA government bonds 10 – – 34 803 – – 34 803
Equity investment in BIS 11 7 184 – – – – 7 184
Unrecognised financial assets
Guarantees 33 – – – – 3 398 3 398
Financial liabilities 
Notes and coin in circulation 15 – – – – 167 771 167 771
Deposits 16 – – – – 579 638 579 638
Foreign deposits 17 – – – 88 338 – 88 338
Other financial liabilities 18 – – – – 2 754 2 754
Liquidity tier liability 19 – – – – 18 779 18 779
FEC liabilities 8 – 6 – – – 6
GFECRA 21 – 363 901 – – – 363 901
Unrecognised financial liabilities
Guarantees 33 – – – – 3 398 3 398
Loan commitments 33 – – – – 119 421 119 421
1 The carrying values of instruments carried at amortised cost closely approximate their fair values.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              185 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
30. Classification of financial assets and liabilities continued
Note(s)
Fair value
through other
comprehensive
income
R mil
SARB
Act 
R mil
Fair value
through profit
or loss –
Mandatory
R mil
Fair value
through profit
or loss –
Designated
R mil
Amortised
cost
R mil
Total1 
R mil
GROUP 2024
Financial assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 2 – – – – 61 743 61 743
Accommodation to banks 3 – – – – 451 451
Investments 4 – – 351 – 23 286 23 637
Other financial assets 5 – – – – 1 686 1 686
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 – 296 721 882 304 – – 1 179 025
FEC assets 8 – 118 – – – 118
Loans and advances 9 – – – – 7 080 7 080
SA government bonds 10 – – 32 007 – – 32 007
Equity investment in BIS 11 6 283 322 – – – 6 605
Unrecognised financial assets
Guarantees 33 – – – – 6 382 6 382
Financial liabilities 
Notes and coin in circulation 15 – – – – 169 504 169 504
Deposits 16 – – – – 474 272 474 272
Foreign deposits 17 – – – 101 224 – 101 224
Other financial liabilities 18 – – – – 3 354 3 354
FEC liabilities 8 – 24 – – – 24
GFECRA 21 – 531 989 – – – 531 989
Unrecognised financial liabilities
Guarantees 33 – – – – 6 382 6 382
Loan commitments 33 – – – – 117 739 117 739
1 The carrying values of instruments carried at amortised cost closely approximate their fair values.
186 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2024/25  • 186 
30. Classification of financial assets and liabilities continued
Note(s)
Fair value
through other
comprehensive
income debt 
instruments
R mil
SARB Act
R mil
Fair value
through profit
or loss –
Mandatory
R mil
Fair value
through profit
or loss –
Designated
R mil
Amortised
cost
R mil
Total1 
R mil
SARB 2025
Financial assets
Amount due by Group companies 34 – – – – 194 194
Accommodation to banks 3 – – – – 353 353
Other financial assets 5 – – – – 1 252 1 252
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 – 355 716 879 985 – – 1 235 701
FEC assets 8 – 78 – – – 78
Loans and advances 9 – – – – 4 494 4 494
SA government bonds 10 – – 34 803 – – 34 803
Equity investment in BIS 11 7 184 – – – – 7 184
Unrecognised financial assets
Guarantees 33 – – – – 3 398 3 398
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 15 – – – – 167 771 167 771
Deposits 16 – – – – 462 002 462 002
Amounts due to Group companies 34 – – – – 50 328 50 328
Foreign deposits 17 – – – 88 338 – 88 338
Other financial liabilities 18 – – – – 1 414 1 414
FEC liabilities 8 – 6 – – – 6
GFECRA 21 – 363 901 – – – 363 901
Unrecognised financial liabilities
Guarantees 33 – – – – 22 177 22 177
Loan commitments 33 – – – – 21 295 21 295
1 The carrying values of instruments carried at amortised cost closely approximate their fair values.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              187 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
30. Classification of financial assets and liabilities continued
Note(s)
Fair value
through other
comprehensive
income debt 
instruments
R mil
SARB Act
R mil
Fair value
through profit
or loss –
Mandatory
R mil
Fair value
through profit
or loss –
Designated
R mil
Amortised
cost
R mil
Total1 
R mil
SARB 2024
Financial assets
Amounts due by Group companies 34 – – – – 777 777
Accommodation to banks 3 – – – – 451 451
Other financial assets 5 – – – – 1 579 1 579
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 – 296 721 882 304 – – 1 179 025
FEC assets 8 – 118 – – – 118
Loans and advances 9 – – – – 7 080 7 080
SA government bonds 10 – – 32 007 – – 32 007
Equity investment in BIS 11 6 283 322 – – – 6 605
Unrecognised financial assets
Guarantees 33 – – – – 6 382 6 382
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 15 – – – – 169 504 169 504
Deposits 16 – – – – 363 947 363 947
Amounts due to Group companies 34 – – – – 28 303 28 303
Foreign deposits 17 – – – 101 224 – 101 224
Other financial liabilities 18 – – – – 1 744 1 744
FEC liabilities 8 – 24 – – – 24
GFECRA 21 – 531 989 – – – 531 989
Unrecognised financial liabilities
Guarantees 33 – – – – 6 382 6 382
Loan commitments 33 – – – – 26 600 26 600
1 The carrying values of instruments carried at amortised cost closely approximate their fair values.
188 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
31. Fair value hierarchy disclosures
The tables below analyse the assets and liabilities of the Group carried at fair value and amortised cost by the level of fair value 
hierarchy. The fair value hierarchy depends on the extent to which quoted prices are used in determining the fair value of the specific 
instruments. The different levels are defined as follows:
Level 1: Fair value is based on quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. These are readily available 
in the market and are normally obtainable from multiple sources.
Level 2: Fair value is based on input other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that is observable for the asset or liability, either 
directly (i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e. derived from prices).
Level 3: Fair value is based on input for the asset or liability that is not based on observable market data (i.e. unobservable inputs).
The Group’s policy is to recognise transfers into and transfers out of the fair value hierarchy levels as at the date of the event or 
change in circumstances that caused the transfer. During the year under review, there were no transfers between any of the levels 
(2024: none).
31.1 Valuation techniques used to derive Level 1 fair values
The fair value of financial instruments traded in active markets are based on quoted market prices as obtained from the custodians at 
the statement of financial position date. A market is regarded as active if quoted prices are readily and regularly available from an 
exchange, dealer broker or pricing services, and those prices represent actual and regularly occurring market transactions on an 
arm’s-length basis. The quoted market price used for financial assets held by the SARB is the current price as per the custodian’s 
pricing hierarchy. These instruments are included in Level 1.
31.2 Valuation techniques used to derive Level 2 fair values
The fair value of financial instruments that are not traded in an active market (e.g., over-the-counter derivatives) is determined by using 
valuation techniques. These valuation techniques maximise the use of observable market data where it is available and rely as little as 
possible on entity-specific estimates. If all significant inputs required to fair value an instrument are observable, the instrument is 
included in Level 2.
Specific valuation techniques used to value financial instruments include the following:
• quoted market prices or dealer quotes for similar instruments are used for gold and foreign exchange and investments;
• the fair value of interest rate swaps is calculated as the present value of the estimated future cash flows based on observable  
yield curves;
• the fair value of FECs is determined using forward exchange rates at the statement of financial position date, with the resulting value 
discounted back to present value; and
• the fair value of all other instruments are derived with reference to yields.
31.3 Valuation techniques used to derive Level 3 fair values
The equity investment in the BIS is classified as Level 3. It is valued at the net asset value adjusted by 30%. This adjustment is not 
subject to sensitivity. The adjusted net asset value of the shares is based on SDRs. No active market exists for these shares. Refer to 
note 11 for more detail.
The revaluation of valuable art is classified as Level 3. Revaluations will be performed every three years by independent, reliable 
valuators. In the absence of an official fair value assessment by an independent valuator the insured value will be used as an indicator 
of fair value. These fair value adjustments are not subject to sensitivity. Refer to note 12 for more detail.
The equity investment in the BIS as well as the revaluation of valuable art are recurring fair value measurements.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              189 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
31. Fair value hierarchy disclosures continued
Reconciliation of assets and liabilities at recurring fair value measurements at Level 3
Opening
balance
R mil
Gains
recognised  
in other
compre-
hensive 
income
R mil
Purchases
R mil
Sales
R mil
Transfers 
((to)/from
GFECRA
R mil
Closing
balance
R mil
GROUP 2025
Assets
Property, plant and equipment  
Valuable art 198 20 – – – 218
Financial assets at FVOCI
Equity investment in BIS 6 605 774 – – (195) 7 184
Total 6 803 794 – – (195) 7 402
GROUP 2024
Assets
Property, plant and equipment
Valuable art 198 – 1 (1) –  198 
Financial assets at FVOCI 
Equity investment in BIS 5 866 417 – – 322  6 605 
Total 6 064 417 1 (1) 322  6 803 
SARB 2025
Assets
Property, plant and equipment
Valuable art 198 20 – – – 218
Financial assets at FVOCI
Equity investment in BIS 6 605 774 – – (195) 7 184
Total 6 803 794 – – (195) 7 402
SARB 2024
Assets
Property, plant and equipment
Valuable art 198 – 1 (1) –  198 
Financial assets at FVOCI
Equity investment in BIS 5 866 417 – – 322  6 605 
Total 6 064 417 1 (1) 322  6 803 
190 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
31. Fair value hierarchy disclosures continued
Note(s)
Level 1
R mil
Level 2
R mil
Level 3
R mil
Total
R mil
GROUP 2025
Items measured at fair value
Non-financial assets
Property, plant and equipment 12 – – 218 218
Investment in associate 34.3 – 3 189 – 3 189
Financial assets
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 470 919 764 782 – 1 235 701
 Gold coin and bullion 231 195 – – 231 195
 Money market instruments and deposits – 233 688 – 233 688
 Securities 239 657 406 564 – 646 221
 Derivatives 67 9 – 76
 IMF SDR assets – 124 521 – 124 521
FEC assets 8 – 78 – 78
SA government bonds 10 34 803 – – 34 803
Equity investment in BIS 11 – – 7 184 7 184
Financial liabilities
FEC liabilities 8 – 6 – 6
Foreign deposits 17 – 88 338 – 88 338
Items not measured at amortised cost 
Financial assets
Cash and cash equivalents 2 – 90 053 – 90 053
Accommodation to banks 3 – 353 – 353
Investments 4 – 425 – 425
Other financial assets 5 – 1 589 – 1 589
Loans and advances 9 – 4 494 – 4 494
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 15 – 167 771 – 167 771
Deposits 16 – 579 638 – 579 638
Other financial liabilities 18 – 2 754 – 2 754
Liquidity tier liability 19 – 18 779 – 18 779
GFECRA 21 363 901 – – 363 901
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              191 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
31. Fair value hierarchy disclosures continued
Note(s)
Level 1
R mil
Level 2
R mil
Level 3
R mil
Total
R mil
GROUP 2024
Items measured at fair value
Non-financial assets
Property, plant and equipment 12 – – 198 198
Investment in associate 34.3 – 3 429 – 3 429
Financial assets
Investments 4 – 351 – 351
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 392 245 786 780 – 1 179 025
 Gold coin and bullion 169 535 – – 169 535
 Money market instruments and deposits – 214 896 – 214 896
 Securities 222 714 444 528 – 667 242
 Derivatives (4) 170 – 166
 IMF SDR assets – 127 186 – 127 186
FEC assets 8 – 118 – 118
SA government bonds 10 32 007 – – 32 007
Equity investment in BIS 11 – – 6 605 6 605
Financial liabilities
FEC liabilities 8 – 24 – 24
Foreign deposits 17 – 101 224 – 101 224
Items not measured at fair value 
Financial assets
Cash and cash equivalents 2 – 61 743 – 61 743
Accommodation to banks 3 – 451 – 451
Investments 4 – 23 286 – 23 286
Other financial assets 5 – 1 686 – 1 686
Loans and advances 9 – 7 080 – 7 080
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 15 – 169 504 – 169 504
Deposits 16 – 474 272 – 474 272
Other financial liabilities 18 – 3 354 – 3 354
GFECRA 21 531 989 – – 531 989
192 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
31. Fair value hierarchy disclosures continued
Note(s)
Level 1
R mil
Level 2
R mil
Level 3
R mil
Total
R mil
SARB 2025
Items measured at fair value
Non-financial assets
Property, plant and equipment 12 – – 218 218
Investment in associate 34.3 – 2 795 – 2 795
Financial assets
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 470 919 764 782 – 1 235 701
 Gold coin and bullion 231 195 – – 231 195
 Money market instruments and deposits - 233 688 – 233 688
 Securities 239 657 406 564 – 646 221
 Derivatives 67 9 – 76
 IMF SDR assets – 124 521 – 124 521
FEC assets 8 – 78 – 78
SA government bonds 10 34 803 – – 34 803
Equity investment in BIS 11 – – 7 184 7 184
Financial liabilities
FEC liabilities 8 – 6 – 6
Foreign deposits 17 – 88 338 – 88 338
Items not measured at fair value 
Financial assets
Amounts due from Group companies 34.4 – 194 – 194
Accommodation to banks 3 – 353 – 353
Other financial assets 5 – 1 252 – 1 252
Loans and advances 9 – 4 494 – 4 494
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 15 – 167 771 – 167 771
Deposits 16 – 462 002 – 462 002
Amounts due to Group companies 34.4 – 50 328 – 50 328
Other financial liabilities 18 – 1 414 – 1 414
GFECRA 21 363 901 – – 363 901
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              193 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
31. Fair value hierarchy disclosures continued
Note(s)
Level 1
R mil
Level 2
R mil
Level 3
R mil
Total
R mil
SARB 2024
Items measured at fair value
Non-financial assets
Property, plant and equipment 12 – – 198 198
Investment in associate 34.3 – 3 106 – 3 106
Financial assets
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 6 392 245 786 780 – 1 179 025
 Gold coin and bullion 169 535 – – 169 535
 Money market instruments and deposits – 214 896 – 214 896
 Securities 222 714 444 528 – 667 242
 Derivatives (4) 170 – 166
 IMF SDR assets – 127 186 – 127 186
FEC assets 8 – 118 – 118
SA government bonds 10 32 007 – – 32 007
Equity investment in BIS 11 – – 6 605 6 605
Financial liabilities
FEC liabilities 8 – 24 – 24
Foreign deposits 17 – 101 224 – 101 224
Items not measured at fair value 
Financial assets
Amounts due from Group companies 34.4 – 777 – 777
Accommodation to banks 3 – 451 – 451
Other financial assets 5 – 1 579 – 1 579
Loans and advances 9 – 7 080 – 7 080
Financial liabilities
Notes and coin in circulation 15 – 169 504 – 169 504
Deposits 16 – 363 946 – 363 946
Amounts due to Group companies 34.4 – 28 303 – 28 303
Other financial liabilities 18 – 1 744 – 1 744
GFECRA 21 531 989 – – 531 989
194 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
32.  Income and expenses according to classification of financial instruments
Total
R mil
FVPL
(Mandatory) 
R mil
FVPL
(Designated) 
R mil
Amortised cost
R mil
FVOCI
R mil
GROUP 2025
Interest revenue 23 184 13 803 – 9 381 –
Interest expense (23 253) – – (23 253) –
Fair value gains 33 669 37 317 (3 648) – –
Dividend income related to investments held at 
year-end 80 – – – 80
GROUP 2024
Interest revenue 25 371 14 674 – 10 697 –
Interest expense (18 339) – – (18 339) –
Fair value gains 20 164 26 036 (5 872) – –
Dividend income related to investments held at 
year-end 62 – – – 62
SARB 2025
Interest revenue 14 868 13 774 – 1 094 –
Interest expense (15 454) – – (15 454) –
Fair value gains 33 559 37 207 (3 648) – –
Dividend income related to investments held at 
year-end 80 – – – 80
SARB 2024
Interest revenue 15 907 14 609 – 1 298 –
Interest expense (9 372) – – (9 372) –
Fair value gains 19 941 25 813 (5 872) – –
Dividend income related to
investments held at year-end 62 – – – 62
33. Commitments, guarantees and contingent liabilities
33.1 Loan guarantee scheme
In May 2020, the SARB entered into an LGS with various participating banks to provide funding to assist businesses recover from the 
impact of COVID-19. The SARB provided a guarantee to the commercial banks for the LGS loans, to the extent of the current exposure 
of R3 billion (2024: R6 billion). The participating banks may claim losses under the scheme subject to a waterfall arrangement. A claim 
under the SARB guarantee is only possible after the participating banks have exhausted the margin entitlement account, the credit 
premium account and the borrowers risk portion. In turn, the SA government issued a guarantee of R100 billion, in favour of the SARB 
for any losses which may be incurred by the SARB in respect of the LGS loans. The government reduced this guarantee from  
R100 billion to R12 billion in April 2022. At 31 March 2025, the LGS loan outstanding amounted to R3 billion. 
33.2 Bounce back scheme
In April 2022, the BBS was established to assist eligible small businesses to recover from the impact of COVID-19, floods and the 
riots that took place in certain parts of the country. In terms of the scheme, the SARB advanced loans to commercial banks, who 
advanced bounce-back loans to eligible businesses. The SARB had approved facilities of R1 billion, of which R938 million was drawn 
down. At 31 March 2025, the balance outstanding amounted to R637 million. The availability period for drawdowns ended on 30 April 
2024. The SARB also issued a guarantee to the commercial banks for losses incurred under the scheme. The SARB guarantee is 
limited to 20.5% of the total capital amount advanced to the commercial banks. In turn, the SA government issued a guarantee of up 
to R8 billion in favour of the SARB, which was subsequently reduced to R960 million. 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              195 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
33. Commitments and guarantees (continued)
33.3 Energy bounce back scheme
In May 2023, the EBBS was established to alleviate the impact of sustained load-shedding on SMEs and households. In terms of the 
scheme, the SARB advances loans to participating commercial banks who advance energy bounce back loans to eligible businesses 
and households. The SARB approved facilities of R12 billion of which R11 billion remained undrawn at 31 March 2025  
(2024: R12 billion undrawn). The SARB also issued a guarantee to the participating commercial banks for losses incurred under the 
scheme. The SARB guarantee is limited to 20.5% of the total capital amount advanced to the participating commercial banks. In turn, 
the SA government issued a guarantee of up to R8 billion in favour of the SARB, to compensate for losses which may be incurred by 
the SARB in respect of the EBBS. Each participating commercial bank may drawdown on the facility for a period of 18 months from 
the signature date of their respective agreements. As at 31 March 2025, the availability period for drawdowns for most of the 
participating commercial banks had ended, with only two remaining participants having an availability period for drawdowns expiring in 
April and June 2025, respectively.
33.4 CODI contingent liability
In terms of section 166AA of the FSR Act, CODI has an obligation to provide protection to qualifying depositors by ensuring that they 
have access to their covered deposits in the event that their bank is placed in resolution. The protection is limited to R100 000 per 
depositor, per bank. The estimated outflow relating to this contingent liability will only be determinable once a particular bank is in 
resolution. As at 31 March 2025, there were no member banks placed in resolution.
33.5 CODI commitment and guarantee
The SARB issued a guarantee to commercial banks for loan amounts provided to CODI for the liquidity tier of the DIF, effective from 1 
April 2024. Member banks of CODI are required to maintain a loan amount of 3% of their covered deposits’ balance with CODI for as 
long as they are licensed. The loan will be repaid by CODI as the entity accumulates sufficient liquidity in the DIF.
The SARB has committed to provide CODI with an emergency funding loan in the event that CODI is unable to meet its obligations, 
as specified in section 166AA of the FSR Act. The total amount of the emergency funding loan will be mutually agreed upon by both 
parties when CODI makes a request for the loan.
33.6 Restricted-use committed liquidity facility
The SARB approved a restricted-use committed liquidity facility (RCLF) of R18 billion to commercial banks effective from 1 February 
2025. The facility is intended to assist commercial banks to manage compliance with the liquidity coverage ratio required by Basel III 
and must be used for liquidity management purposes. The facility was undrawn as at 31 March 2025. 
33.7 Inter-governmental cash co-ordination
Loans are advanced by the CPD as part of the national government’s IGCC arrangement, in terms of which some state-owned 
entities and treasuries of provincial governments deposit excess funds with the CPD to form a pool of funds from the public sector. 
NT and the provincial treasuries may borrow money from the IGCC pool of funds. The SA government guarantees that the deposits 
will be made available to depositors on demand. 
The IGCC loans are unsecured, short-term in nature and callable on demand. The loans earn interest at repo plus 0.1%, which 
was 7.6% (2024: repo plus 0.1% which was 8.35%) at the reporting date. As at 31 March 2025, the IGCC loan balance was  
Rnil (2024: Rnil). 
The CPD and the SARB concluded updated IGCC legal agreements with NT, provincial treasuries and state-owned entities. 
These agreements clarify repayment terms for the facility and outline the procedures in the event of default. The agreements 
further clarify that the CPD and SARB are administrative parties in the IGCC arrangement and will not be liable for any losses on 
the facility. As a result, the ECL allowance relating to the IGCC facility has been reversed in full. Refer to note 29.2 for 
movements on the ECL allowance.
196 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
34. Related party information
The following list provides an overview of the nature of relationships relevant to the SARB Group:
Subsidiaries:
CPD, CODI, SABN, SA Mint and Prestige Bullion (a subsidiary of SA Mint)
Associates:
ABHL 
Grindrod Bank (a subsidiary of ABHL)
African Bank Limited (a subsidiary of ABHL)
African Bank Insurance Group Limited (a subsidiary of ABHL)
Other key relationships:
SARB Retirement Fund
SA government (NT)
34.1 Investment in subsidiaries
Authorised and issued 
share capital GROUP SARB
 Number of 
shares 
’000 % held
 2025 
R mil
 2024 
R mil
 2025
R mil 
 2024 
R mil
CPD 2 000 100 – – 2 2
SABN 61 000 100 – – 803 803
 Share capital 61 000 100 – – 61 61
 Subordinated loan – – – – 742 742
SA Mint 60 000 100 – – 206 206
CODI 1 000 100 – – 1 1
Total investment in subsidiaries – – 1 012 1 012
Contribution to group profit
The contribution to the Group profit attributable to the parent (pre-elimination of intercompany transactions) is as follows:
CPD 775 929 – –
SABN 40 (87) – –
SA Mint 137 229 – –
CODI 1 380 (1) – –
Total contribution to Group profit 2 332 1 070 – –
Financial assistance to subsidiaries
The subordinated loan to the SABN of R742 million (2024: R742 million) bears no interest and has no fixed terms of repayment. The 
SARB may demand repayment of the loan provided the subsidiary’s assets exceed its liabilities. When recalled, the subsidiary has the 
option to convert the loan to share capital. The loan is included as a separate category of equity by SABN and is thus included as a 
component of the SARB’s investment in subsidiary.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              197 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
34. Related party information continued
34.1 Investment in subsidiaries continued 
34.1.1 Investment in Prestige Bullion
Prestige Bullion is a subsidiary of the SA Mint. The SA Mint holds a 80% (2024: 80%) interest in Prestige Bullion. Prestige Bullion 
distributes and sells bullion Krugerrand coins to local and international markets. The SA Mint is responsible for the manufacturing 
while the marketing and distribution of the coins is done by Rand Refinery Proprietary Limited (Rand Refinery).
Main business 
Manufacturing 
of blanks, marketing 
and distribution 
of legal tender 
Bullion coin 
Country of incorporation  South Africa 
Interest held as non-controlling 20% 
Percentage voting rights held by non-controlling interest 20%
Rand Refinery holds the 20% non-controlling interest in Prestige Bullion.
Summarised financial information of Prestige Bullion
The below summarised financial information consists of extracts from  Prestige Bullion's Statement of financial position and Statement 
of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
PRESTIGE BULLION
2025
R mil
2024
R mil
Statement of financial position
Current assets 822 1 326
Total assets 822 1 326
Total equity 439 365
Current liabilities 383 961
Total liabilities 383 961
Total equity and liabilities 822 1 326
Statement of comprehensive income
Revenue 1 819 1 815
Gross profit 119 315
Operating expenses (25) (35)
Profit before tax 100 284
Total comprehensive income 73 207
198 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
34. Related party information continued
34.1 Investment in subsidiaries continued 
34.1.2 Transactions with non-controlling interests
Rand Refinery
Rand Refinery has a 20% interest and therefore holds a non-controlling interest in Prestige Bullion.
GROUP
 2025 
R mil
 2024
R mil
Profit attributable to non-controlling interest 15 41
Accumulated non-controlling interest at year-end 81 66
No significant restrictions exist on the SARB’s ability to access or use the assets to settle the liabilities of the Group.
34.2 Inventory held on behalf of the SARB by the SA Mint
At year-end, coin inventory of R773 million (2024: R671 million) was held on behalf of the SARB.
34.3 Investment in associate
ABHL is the holding company of ABL and African Insurance Group Limited (AIG). The ABHL Group’s business operations consist 
primarily of retail banking and the provision of insurance products to banking clients. ABHL ’s registered office is 59 16th Road, 
Midrand, South Africa.
On 25 March 2025, ABHL implemented an employee share scheme, which resulted in the dilution of the SARB’s shareholding from 
50% to 45%, for no proceeds. The SARB incurred a loss on the dilution of R311 million, which was recognised in profit or loss. The 
SARB has, however, retained significant influence in ABHL.
Dividends of R65 million (2024: R50 million) were received from ABHL in the current financial year.
Authorised and issued 
share capital GROUP SARB
African Bank Holdings Limited
Number of 
shares 
’000 % held
 2025 
R mil
 2024 
R mil
 2025
R mil 
 2024 
R mil
Cost 250 000  45 5 000 5 000 5 000 5 000
Accumulated profit attributable to Group  1 437 1 366 – –
Accumulated impairment losses  (2 937) (2 937) (1 894) (1 894)
Loss in dilution of shareholding (311) _ (311) _
Carrying value of investment  
in associate 3 189 3 429 2 795 3 106
34.3.1 Impairment assessment for investment in associate
An impairment assessment for the investment in associate is only required when there is an indicator of impairment. However, due to 
the purpose of this investment being linked to the mandate of the SARB, an impairment assessment is performed periodically to 
closely monitor the investment.
During the current financial year, no impairment loss was recognised (2024: R982 million impairment loss). 
The recoverable amount, for the purposes of determining the impairment loss or reversal, was calculated by means of the 'fair value 
less costs to sell' method, applying the discounted cash flow technique. 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              199 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
34. Related party information continued
34.3 Investment in associate continued 
34.3.1 Impairment assessment for investment in associate continued
Management made the following key assumptions in its determination of fair value less costs to sell:
• ABHL is a going concern and would be able to continue operating for the foreseeable future.
• Future cash flows were based on financial budgets approved by ABHL management covering a five-year period.
• The growth rate for cash flows into perpetuity was calculated with reference to the SARB published inflation target range of  
3–6%.
•  A discount rate of 17.93% (2024: 18.62%) was used to calculate the present value of future cash flows. The discount rate was 
determined using the Capital Asset Pricing Model, based on the below key inputs for various scenarios at the time of the valuation:
•  South African risk free rate of 11.08% based on the daily average yield on government bonds with an outstanding maturity of 
10 years and longer.
•   Beta of 0.75% and an equity market risk premium of 5.43% based on quoted indicators of similar listed entities.
•   Alpha risk adjustment of 2.5% to adjust for the inherent uncertainty in long-term cash flow forecasts.
34.3.2 Sensitivity analysis
GROUP SARB
 2025 
R mil
 2024 
R mil
 2025 
R mil
 2024 
R mil
The effect of a 1% increase and decrease in the discount rate 
is as follows:
ABHL carrying value
 1% decrease 3 238 3 494 2 844 3 171
 Valuation basis 3 189 3 429 2 795 3 106
 1% increase 3 142 3 366 2 748 3 044
Impairment (loss)/reversal
 1% decrease 49 (917) 49 (917)
 Valuation basis – (982) – (982)
 1% increase (48) (1 044) (48) (1 044)
The effect of a 10% increase and decrease in the cash flow 
forecast is as follows:
ABHL carrying value
 10% decrease  869 3 118 2 475 2 796
 Valuation basis 3 189 3 429 2 795 3 106
 10% increase 3 510 3 740 3 116 3 417
Impairment (loss)/reversal
 10% decrease (320) (1 293) (320) (1 293)
 Valuation basis – (982) – (982)
 10% increase 320 (671) 320 (671)
200 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
34. Related party information continued
34.4 Amounts due by/to related parties
GROUP SARB
 2025 
R mil
 2024 
R mil
 2025 
R mil
 2024 
R mil
Amounts due by related parties
Loans and advances1
CPD – – – 763
Grindrod Bank – 26 – 26
ABL 20 – 20 –
Other assets2
SABN – – 178 5
SA Mint – – 14 9
CODI – – 2 –
Grindrod Bank – 2 – 2
ABL 5 – 2 –
Amounts due to related parties
Deposits3
CPD – – 30 287 28 268
SA government
Non-interest-bearing 123 689 128 544 123 616 128 472
Interest-bearing 91 139 91 139 – –
CODI4 – – 19 927 –
ABL – 2 463 – 2 463
Grindrod Bank – 2 528 – 2 528
Other liabilities5
SABN – – _ 26
SA Mint – – 1 9
SA government (GFECRA liability)6 363 829 531 895 363 829 531 895
CODI – – 114 –
SARB Retirement Fund 78 71 – –
SA government (Treasury SDR account) 759 – 759 –
ABL 474 – – –
1  Loans and advances consist of intercompany overdraft balances and LGS advances. Overdraft balances are held with the SARB for daily cash management and 
interest  on overdrawn balances is charged at the repo rate. Refer to note 9 for details on the terms of the LGS advances.
2 Other assets consist of trade receivables as well as LGS margin entitlement and credit premium balances. Refer to note 5 for details.
3 Deposits consist of current accounts, call deposits and bank reserve accounts. Refer to note 16 for details.
4 CODI deposits held with the SARB include DIF investments of R20 billion (2024: Rnil).
5 Other liabilities comprise trade payables. Refer to note 18.
6 Refer to note 21 for details on amounts owed to the SA government.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              201 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
34. Related party information continued 
34.5 Transactions between the SARB and its related parties
GROUP SARB
 2025 
R mil
 2024 
R mil
 2025 
R mil
 2024 
R mil
Interest revenue
ABL 93 86 126 86
Grindrod Bank 50 85 50 85
CPD – – 5 11
SA government 254 401 – –
397 572 181 182
Dividends received
ABHL 65 50 65 50
65 50 65 50
Interest paid
ABL 26 1 4 1
Grindrod Bank 11 4 2 4
CPD – – 2 363 2 218
SA government 10 113 11 074 – –
CODI – – 1 434 –
SARB Retirement Fund 8 5 – –
10 158 11 084 3 803 2 223
Administration fees received
CPD – – 4 4
SABN – – – 1
SA Mint – – 1 3
SARB Retirement Fund 5 5 5 5
5 5 10 13
Administration and management fees paid
SABN – – 37 33
SA Mint – – 5 4
SARB Retirement Fund 1 5 – –
1 5 42 37
Rent paid
SABN – – 2 1
– – 2 1
Other income1
ABL 29 1 4 1
Grindrod Bank   7 1 – 1
SA government 100 000 – 100 000 –
100 036 2 100 004 2
Cost of new currency
SABN – – 1 545 867
SA Mint – – 892 876
– – 2 437 1 743
Pension fund contributions
SARB Retirement Fund 366 325 332 294
366 325 332 294
1 Other income comprises SAMOS fees, PA levies, CODI levies and premiums; and income from NT to support the policy solvency of the SARB.
202 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
34. Related party information continued
34.6 Directors’ remuneration
GROUP SARB
 2025
R’000
 2024 
R’000
 2025 
R’000
 2024 
R’000
Executive directors: Remuneration for services
Governor E L Kganyago
 Remuneration and recurring fringe benefits 9 882 9 324 9 882 9 324
 Other fringe benefits 380 396 380 396
10 262 9 720 10 262 9 720
Deputy Governor K Naidoo1
 Remuneration and recurring fringe benefits 1 088 6 638 1 088 6 638
 Other fringe benefits – 2 – 2
1 088 6 640 1 088 6 640
Deputy Governor N Tshazibana
 Remuneration and recurring fringe benefits 7 033 6 638 7 033 6 638
 Other fringe benefits 41 54 41 54
7 074 6 692 7 074 6 692
Deputy Governor R Cassim
 Remuneration and recurring fringe benefits 6 994 6 613 6 994 6 613
 Other fringe benefits 73 45 73 45
7 067 6 658 7 067 6 658
Deputy Governor M Modise
 Remuneration and recurring fringe benefits 6 933 – 6 933 –
 Other fringe benefits 94 – 94 –
7 027 – 7 027 –
Total remuneration of executive directors 32 518 29 710 32 518 29 710
Non-executive directors: Remuneration for services
C B Buitendag 574 547 574 547
J M S D Msomi 888 671 888 671
K Badimo 695 644 695 644
L H Molebatsi 713 666 713 666
N Vink 560 529 560 529
N B Mbazima 1 450 1 158 795 742
M M T Ramano 637 628 637 628
K W Mzondeki 571 253 571 253
S Gaibie 538 513 538 513
T Nombembe 107 426 – 207
Y G Muthien 666 629 666 629
Z Hoosen 801 752 801 752
Total remuneration of non-executive directors 8 200 7 416 7 438 6 781
Total remuneration of directors 40 718 37 126 39 956 36 491
1 Resigned in December 2023.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              203 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
PRUDENTIAL 
AUTHORITY 
ANNUAL 
FINANCIAL 
ACCOUNTS
204 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25

SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              205 
Annual financial statements 2024/25

206 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
The PA is the regulator responsible for setting policy and prudential regulatory requirements and supervisor responsible for overseeing 
compliance with the regulatory requirements of financial institutions that provide financial products, securities services and market 
infrastructures in South Africa. Established on 1 April 2018 in terms of the FSR Act, the PA is a juristic person operating within the 
administration of the SARB. 
Basis of preparation
In terms of section 55 of the FSR Act, the SARB is required to prepare financial accounts for the PA for each financial year in a 
manner that reflects the direct costs that accrue to the PA. As the PA is a department within the SARB, it follows the same Financial 
Reporting Framework and basis of presentation as the SARB. Refer to note 1 of the SARB financial statements for more detail.
Statement of financial position at 31 March 2025 
Prudential Authority
Note
 2025
R mil
 2024 
R mil
Assets
Other assets 49 47
Liabilities
Income received in advance 26 17
Other liabilities 21 28
Unclaimed balances 2 2
Total liabilities 49 47
Statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income  
for the year ended 31 March 2025
Operating income
Levies 2.1 596 550
Fees 2.2 13 7
Operating income – 6
Total operating income 609 563
Expenditure
Personnel costs 2.4 (422) (393)
Operational costs 2.4 (220) (212)
Total expenditure (642) (605)
Amounts borne by the SARB 2.5 33 42
Profit for the year – –
Prudential Authority annual financial accounts
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              207 
Annual financial statements 2024/25
1. Accounting policies
1.1 Other assets
Other assets relate to the notional balance at the end of the reporting period, which represents the difference between cash inflows 
and outflows during the year in respect of prudential regulatory activity, as well as prepaid expenses. Prepaid expenses relate to 
operating costs paid before they are due. The prepaid expenses are measured at cost and are recognised when the amount is paid. 
The prepaid expense balances are subsequently measured at cost and are derecognised in the period in which the related expense  
is recognised.
1.2 Other liabilities
Other liabilities relate to operating income received in advance. The liabilities are measured at the amount actually received and 
recognised when the amount is received. The balance is subsequently measured at cost and is derecognised in the period in which 
the related income is recognised.
1.3 Unclaimed balances
Unclaimed balances relate to amounts recovered from an illegal deposit-taking scheme. The amounts recognised are owed to 
unidentified investors of the scheme who are yet to claim the amounts due to them. The unclaimed balances are recognised when  
the amounts are recovered from the scheme and are measured at the amount payable to the investors, being the amount actually 
recovered. The unclaimed balances are subsequently measured at cost and are derecognised when the amounts are paid to the 
relevant investors or upon expiry of the right to claim.
1.4 Operating income
Operating income consists of levies, fees and penalties charged to financial institutions. The levies, fees and income are charged  
and measured in accordance with the relevant legislation. Operating income is recognised per the amount invoiced to the financial 
institution, in the period in which the amount relates.
1.5 Personnel and operating costs
Personnel and operating costs relate to direct costs incurred for the administration of the PA. These costs are measured at the 
transaction amount and are recognised as expenses in the period incurred.
1.6 Amounts borne by the SARB
Net costs incurred for the administration of the PA, are borne by the SARB. These costs are measured at the transaction amount and  
are recognised as income or expenses in the period incurred, net of recoveries.
2. Explanatory notes
2.1 Levies are charged to regulated financial institutions in terms of legislation, to cover the direct operating costs of the PA.
2.2 Fees are 'transaction-based' and charged to fund the PA’s performance of specific functions under the FSR Act and the relevant 
sector laws it regulates.
2.3 Penalties are raised for non-compliance by persons within the regulated sector should they be found guilty of contravening a 
financial sector law or an enforceable undertaking accepted by the PA. The PA deducts from this total all costs incurred in making and 
enforcing the administrative penalty order. The remaining balance after applying this deduction is paid into the National Revenue Fund 
(NRF) (if any). The SARB also has a responsibility in terms of the FIC Act to ensure that banks and life insurance companies comply 
with the FIC Act. The SARB has authority in terms of the Section 45C of the FIC Act to impose administrative sanctions on these 
entities if and when they fail to comply with a provision, order, determination or directive made in terms of this Act. The SARB issues 
notices with the said penalties to the relevant entities but does not account for the penalties in its financial statements as the penalties 
imposed are paid directly to the NRF. Total penalties issued on behalf of the SA government in this regard amounted to R20 million 
(2024: 1 million).
Prudential Authority annual financial accounts 
continued
208 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Annual financial statements 2024/25
2.4 Personnel and operating costs consist of only the direct costs related to the administration of the PA. Although the PA uses 
the various support departments of the SARB and incurs costs from these services (such as legal services, IT, risk management, 
compliance, internal audit, HR, international economic relations and policy, security and facilities), these costs are borne by the SARB.
Prudential Authority
 2025 
R mil
 2024
R mil
Operating costs include:
Professional fees 169 170
Membership fees 3 4
Official functions 17 6
Training (foreign and local) 4 4
Travel expenses (foreign and local) 23 23
Other operating costs 4 5
220 212
2.5 Amount borne by SARB consists of both direct and indirect expenses (net of recoveries) borne by the SARB for the 
administration of the PA.
Prudential Authority annual financial accounts 
continued

SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              209 
Additional information 2024/25
ADDITIONAL 
INFORMATION
210 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Additional information 2024/25
The Chairperson, SARB Governor Lesetja Kganyago, 
extended a warm welcome to all who had joined the 
hybrid meeting and declared the 104th annual AGM of 
the shareholders of the SARB duly constituted in terms 
of the regulations to the SARB Act.
The Chairperson advised the shareholders that the SARB 
was holding its second hybrid AGM using the Council for 
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) venue and not 
its own conference facilities. This arrangement was due 
to a renovation and construction project continuing at the 
SARB Head Office in Pretoria. Due to the limited space 
available for conference facilities at the temporary venue 
at the Irene Link building, the SARB had again 
considered the CSIR as a suitably conducive and 
accessible venue in the Pretoria vicinity. The Chairperson 
thanked the shareholders for their understanding.
The Chairperson informed the shareholders present at 
the AGM that the proceedings of the meeting were being 
recorded for future reference, if it became necessary. The 
meeting complied with the Protection of Personal 
Information Act 4 of 2013. The shareholders had been 
requested during registration on the LUMI Technologies 
SA Proprietary Limited (LUMI) platform to give consent to 
the SARB/LUMI to collect, collate, process and store 
their data for the purposes of this meeting. He reminded 
the shareholders joining online that they could ask 
questions related to the business of the meeting in a 
written format or through a virtual microphone. He also 
confirmed that written messages could be submitted at 
any time prior to a matter being put to a vote.
All the shareholders present in person and online who 
held 200 or more shares in the SARB, and who were 
entitled to vote in accordance with the provisions of the 
SARB Act and its regulations, were advised that voting 
on each of the matters under consideration at the AGM 
would take place by means of a poll conducted 
electronically and facilitated by LUMI, an independent 
external party.
The Chairperson mentioned that shareholders’ questions 
would be answered during the meeting, and that both 
the questions and the answers would be recorded in the 
minutes. However, should questions from shareholders 
be received after the closing of the poll and question 
time, they would be responded to directly via their 
registered email address.
Minutes of the 104th annual Ordinary  
General Meeting
of the shareholders of the South African Reserve Bank – held on  
30 July 2024
The Chairperson introduced the following persons who 
had joined him on the podium and were available to 
answer any questions that the shareholders might have 
on the matters before the meeting:
•  SARB DGs: Ms Nomfundo Tshazibana,  
Dr Rashad Cassim and Dr Mampho Modise;
•  Chairperson of the Audit Committee, Mr Norman 
Mbazima;
• Chairperson of Remco, Dr Yvonne Muthien;
• Chairperson of BREC, Mr Zoaib Hoosen;
• Chairperson of Nedcom, Ms Lerato Molebatsi;
• SARB General Counsel, Ms Rebecca Tee; and
• Secretary of the SARB, Ms Zoliswa Copiso.
The Chairperson made the following announcements to the 
shareholders:
•  He mentioned that, as he had reported at the 2023 
AGM, the third term of office of Dr Terence Nombembe 
as a government-appointed non-executive director had 
expired on 15 July 2023. The President had filled that 
vacancy by appointing Ms Kholeka Mzondeki as the 
government-appointed non-executive director to the 
SARB Board for a period of three years, with effect from 
23 September 2023.
•  He further mentioned that his second term as the SARB 
Governor was due to expire on 8 November 2024. 
However, in March 2024, the President had reappointed 
him as the SARB Governor for another five-year term, 
with effect from 9 November 2024.
•  The President had also reappointed both DGs Fundi 
Tshazibana and Rashad Cassim for another five-year 
term, with effect from 1 August 2024, since their first 
term as DGs was due to expire on 31 July 2024.
•  Following the resignation of Mr Kuben Naidoo as a DG 
with effect from 1 December 2023, the President had 
appointed Dr Mampho Modise as a DG for a five-year 
term with effect from 1 April 2024.
The Chairperson presented his address, which follows 
these minutes for record-keeping purposes, marked as 
‘Annexure A’.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              211 
Additional information 2024/25
The Chairperson then turned to the formal business  
of the day and confirmed the agenda for the AGM  
as follows:
•  Receive and accept the minutes of the AGM held 
on 28 July 2023.
•  Receive and consider the SARB’s annual financial 
statements for the financial year ended 31 March 
2024, including the directors’ report and the 
independent external auditors’ report.
•  Approve the appointment of (i) BDO and SNG 
Grant Thornton as the SARB’s independent 
external auditors for the 2024/25 financial year in 
terms of regulation 22.1(a) read with regulation 
7.3(c) of the regulations to the SARB Act; and (ii) 
BDO and Ernst & Young Incorporated (EY) as the 
SARB’s independent external auditors starting 
from the 2025/26 financial year.
•  Elect three non-executive directors to the  
SARB Board.
•  Consider any further business arising from the 
items mentioned above (in terms of regulation 
7.3(e) of the regulations to the SARB Act).
The Chairperson confirmed that the Secretary of the 
SARB had not received any requests for special business 
to be placed on the agenda of this AGM in terms of 
regulation 7.3(d) of the regulations to the SARB Act.
The Secretary of the SARB confirmed the shareholder 
representation at this hybrid AGM at the time of reporting 
as follows:
•  The total number of shares in the issued share 
capital of the SARB held by its shareholders was  
2 000 000 (two million).
•  Twenty shareholders were present in person  
and online.
•  Eight shareholders were represented by proxy.
•  There were 440 votes exercisable by the 
shareholders present in person or online, and 
those holding duly certified proxy forms for  
this purpose.
The shareholders were reminded that voting on each of 
the matters under consideration at the AGM would take 
place by means of a poll conducted electronically and 
facilitated by LUMI.
The Chairperson then invited the shareholders to submit 
any questions related to the first four resolutions.
A shareholder, Dr Jannie Rossouw, referred to the 
recommendation of BDO and EY as the SARB’s 
independent external auditors starting from the 2025/26 
financial year. He stated that it was not a practice at the 
SARB to recommend to shareholders the appointment of 
the SARB’s independent external auditors a year ahead 
of the 2025 AGM. Dr Rossouw enquired whether the SARB 
would present the same recommendation again for 
confirmation by the shareholders at the 2025 AGM.
The Chairperson stated that the rationale to appoint the 
SARB’s independent external auditors a year ahead was 
due to the overlap of handover from the SARB’s 2024/25 
independent external auditors to EY from 1 April 2025.
Acceptance of the minutes of the 
2023 AGM
The Chairperson proposed that the minutes of the 103rd 
AGM held on 28 July 2023 (included in the SARB Annual 
Report 2023/24) be taken as read and accepted.
There were no objections or corrections to the minutes.
Based on the results of the poll, the Chairperson declared 
that the minutes of the 2023 AGM were accepted by 
98.91% of the votes cast, while 1.09% had abstained  
from voting.
Acceptance of the SARB’s annual 
financial statements for the 
financial year ended 31 March 
2024, including the directors’ 
report and the independent 
external auditors’ report
The Chairperson formally presented the annual financial 
statements of the SARB for the financial year ended  
31 March 2024, including the directors’ report and the 
independent external auditors’ report.
The summarised SARB Group annual financial statements 
were included in the SARB Annual Report 2023/24, which 
had been published on the SARB website and posted to 
the shareholders on 28 June 2024. The full set of the 
2023/24 SARB annual financial statements had also been 
made available on the SARB website on the same day.
Based on the results of the poll, the Chairperson declared 
that the SARB’s audited annual financial statements for the 
financial year ended 31 March 2024 were accepted by 
96.45% of the votes cast, while 3.55% had abstained  
from voting.
Remuneration of the SARB’s 
independent external auditors
The Chairperson proposed that the remuneration of the 
SARB’s independent external auditors in respect of the 
general statutory audit of the SARB for the financial year 
ended 31 March 2024 be confirmed and approved.
Based on the results of the poll, the Chairperson declared 
that the remuneration of the SARB’s independent external 
auditors for the general statutory audit for the financial year 
ended 31 March 2024, amounting to R22 726 955 
excluding VAT, was approved by 100% of the votes cast.
212 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Additional information 2024/25
Appointment of independent 
external auditors
The Chairperson then turned to the appointment of 
independent external auditors for the 2024/25 and 
2025/26 financial years, as follows:
•  BDO and SNG Grant Thornton as the SARB’s 
independent external auditors for the 2024/25 
financial year, in terms of regulation 22.1(a) read 
with regulation 7.3(c) of the regulations to the 
SARB Act.
  Based on the results of the poll, the Chairperson 
declared that BDO and SNG Grant Thornton were 
appointed as the SARB’s independent external 
auditors for the 2024/25 financial year, by 100% of 
the votes cast.
  The auditors were congratulated on their 
reappointment.
•   BDO and EY as the SARB’s independent external 
auditors starting from the 2025/26 financial year.
The Chairperson reported that SNG Grant 
Thornton had been auditing the SARB Group for 
more than a decade and its tenure was due to 
expire on 31 March 2025. The Audit Committee’s 
Mandatory Audit Firm Rotation Policy states that 
an audit firm cannot serve as the appointed 
auditors of the SARB Group for more than 10 
consecutive years. Accordingly, SNG Grant 
Thornton would be conducting its last audit work 
for the SARB Group for the financial year ending 
31 March 2025.
The SARB’s Audit Committee had satisfied itself 
with the process of selecting a firm of independent 
external auditors that would replace SNG Grant 
Thornton as a new joint external auditor to the 
SARB Group. The new external auditor would 
conduct the audit jointly with the existing and 
remaining audit firm, BDO.
It was reported that the SARB Audit Committee, 
supported by the Board, had recommended the 
appointment of EY and the reappointment of BDO 
as the SARB’s independent external auditors for 
the 2025/26 financial year. The appointment of EY 
for the provision of joint external audit services 
starting from the 2025/26 financial year was 
subject to the annual re-election process that 
would be followed at the SARB’s AGM, for a 
potential maximum period of 10 years.
Based on the results of the poll, the Chairperson 
declared that BDO and EY were appointed as the 
SARB’s independent external auditors for the 
2025/26 financial year, by 100% of the votes cast.
The Chairperson congratulated EY on its 
appointment and BDO for its reappointment.
Election of three non-executive 
directors
The Chairperson turned to the election of three non-
executive directors to fill the vacancies for shareholder-
elected non-executive directors that would become 
available on the day after the AGM. The terms of office of 
Ms Muthien as a non-executive director with knowledge 
and skills in commerce and finance, Ms Gaibie as a 
non-executive director with knowledge and skills in labour, 
and Mr Mbazima as a non-executive director with 
knowledge and skills in mining would expire on the day 
after the 2024 AGM. They were all eligible and available for 
re-election by the shareholders.
The Panel, appointed in terms of section 4(1C) of the SARB 
Act, had considered the nominations for these vacancies. 
This Panel comprised:
•  the Governor of the SARB, Mr Lesetja Kganyago;
• r etired Constitutional Court Judge Baaitse Elizabeth 
Nkabinde and Prof. Deon Rossouw, the CEO of the 
Ethics Institute of South Africa, both nominated by 
the Minister of Finance; and
•  Messrs Kaizer Moyane and Thulani Tshefuta, both 
nominated by Nedlac.
The Panel had confirmed three candidates in terms of 
section 4(1G) of the SARB Act for consideration for the 
three vacancies and was satisfied that all three candidates 
were eligible as well as fit and proper to stand for election 
as directors of the SARB. The CVs of these three 
candidates had been sent to the shareholders together with 
the Notice of the Meeting.
The Chairperson then invited the shareholders to submit 
any questions related to the three resolutions to elect the 
non-executive directors. No questions were raised regarding 
the three resolutions.
Ms Muthien had been the only candidate selected by the 
Panel with knowledge and skills in commerce and finance 
to fill the first position for a non-executive director. She was 
re-elected as a non-executive director with expertise in 
commerce and finance, with 84.37% of the votes cast in 
favour and 1.5% votes against, while 14.13% had 
abstained from voting.
Ms Gaibie had been the only candidate selected by the 
Panel with knowledge and skills in labour to fill the second 
position for a non-executive director. She was re-elected as 
a non-executive director with labour expertise, with 84.65% 
of the votes cast in favour and 10.02% votes against, while 
5.33% had abstained from voting.
Mr Mbazima had been the only candidate selected by the 
Panel with knowledge and skills in mining to fill the third 
position for a non-executive director. He was re-elected as 
a non-executive director with expertise in mining, with 
86.81% of the votes cast in favour and 0.48% votes 
against, while 12.71% had abstained from voting.
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              213 
Additional information 2024/25
The Chairperson congratulated all three persons on their 
re-election as non-executive directors. In terms of section 
5 of the SARB Act, their appointments would be effective 
from 31 July 2024 to the day after the AGM in 2027.
Special business to be 
considered at this AGM
The Chairperson reiterated his earlier confirmation that 
the Secretary of the SARB had not received any requests 
for special business to be placed on the agenda of this 
AGM. However, he invited the shareholders to raise any 
questions arising from the matters under consideration at 
the AGM and from his speech.
A shareholder, Dr Rossouw, expressed appreciation for 
the establishment of CODI to protect qualifying bank 
depositors in the event of a bank failure. He sought 
clarity on whether the R100 000 that could be accessed 
by the qualifying bank depositors (should their bank be 
placed into resolution) was per institution or per deposit 
per institution. The Chairperson explained that the 
qualifying bank depositors are covered (up to R100 000) 
per institution irrespective of the number of accounts a 
depositor has in the same institution.
Another shareholder, Mr Benny Manyala, enquired 
whether the SARB was planning to issue digital 
certificates to shareholders to replace the current paper 
certificates. The Chairperson stated that the SARB Act 
would have to be amended to allow for digital certificates 
as the current SARB Act stipulates the issuance of paper 
shareholder certificates.
Mr Manyala further asked how South Africa’s inflation 
target was determined and the factors that were taken 
into consideration. The Chairperson provided context by 
stating that the inflation target was determined through a 
process jointly coordinated or managed by the SARB 
and NT in the Macroeconomics Standing Committee. An 
appropriate inflation target for South Africa was set 
through consideration of South Africa’s previous inflation 
and economic performance, including how South Africa 
compared with its peer countries.
There were no further questions or comments from the 
shareholders.
The Chairperson then gave Mr Sim Tshabalala, the 
Group Chief Executive of Standard Bank Group Limited 
(SBG), the opportunity to propose a vote of thanks to the 
SARB on behalf of his organisation, the financial services 
sector and the SARB shareholders.
Mr Tshabalala expressed profound gratitude to the SARB 
for its outstanding and globally recognised work as well 
as its continued excellence in pursuit of every element of 
its mandate. He mentioned that the SARB continued to 
be recognised as one of the most skilled, effective and 
credible monetary authorities in the world. He stated that 
it was beyond any doubt that the SARB could – and 
would – always do what was required to keep inflation 
expectations well anchored to the target range.
Mr Tshabalala mentioned that the CPI had remained well 
within its target range for most part of the past 15 years. 
Then, since 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and increased 
geopolitical tensions had together provided a textbook 
challenge to monetary policy. He mentioned that the SARB 
had shown itself to be a truly credible and independent 
central bank by bringing inflation back down into the target 
range in short order when South Africa was confronted by 
large exogenous shocks to prices without having to resort 
to excessively high real policy rates.
Mr Tshabalala stated that the SARB provided a solid and 
dependable policy anchor through challenging political and 
global cycles. By doing so, it reduced the costs and risks of 
borrowing while making more investment possible and 
enabling easier and more confident decision-making by all 
of South Africa’s economic actors. SBG therefore 
wholeheartedly endorsed the SARB’s view that low and 
steady inflation was conducive to faster, more sustainable 
and more inclusive economic growth.
Regarding prudential regulation, Mr Tshabalala stated that 
the SARB’s PA continued to be regarded as one of the 
strongest and most advanced prudential regulators in the 
world. The SARB had played an important global role in the 
development of the final Basel III requirements and South 
Africa would, without a doubt, be among the first countries 
to achieve full adoption of the ‘Basel endgame’.
Furthermore, the PA was one of the leading global voices 
on the single most prominent issue facing humanity, being 
the management and mitigation of climate change. The PA 
was doing globally important work in developing central 
banks’ approach to the management of climate risk and 
supporting the growth of a more sustainable finance 
market.
Mr Tshabalala highlighted that the SARB’s FinStab similarly 
continued to do work of great national importance in 
analysing and developing a South African systemic risk 
management framework.
Overall, it was his opinion that the SARB’s very thoughtful 
and highly systematic prudential and risk management work 
was bearing fruit in the soundness and stability of the entire 
South African banking system.
Experts and industry insiders understood the SARB’s 
achievements in terms of things such as capital and liquidity 
ratios, stress tests and resolution plans. SBG had daily 
experience of interacting with the punctilious and probing 
officials of the PA and FinStab. Despite all the economic 
shocks and political uncertainty, South Africa had been 
experiencing chronic social and economic vulnerabilities 
caused by extreme inequality. But there was complete 
public confidence in the soundness and efficiency of the 
financial system.
Continuing with his speech, Mr Tshabalala drew attention to 
the excellent work that the SARB had done this year to 
increase the probability that South Africa would be removed 
from the FATF greylist in 2025. Along with NT, this was yet 
another example of the SARB being among the most 
constructive participants in South Africa’s national life.
214 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Additional information 2024/25
Similarly, Mr Tshabalala pointed out the continued 
excellence of the payments cluster, which quietly yet very 
effectively kept the South African economy’s transactions 
functioning smoothly. He further commended the 
banknotes and coin-producing teams, which were 
making an invaluable contribution to maintaining the 
country’s national identity, supporting social inclusion and 
combating crime.
Mr Tshabalala mentioned that it was particularly 
important not to overlook the work of the SARB’s ERD 
and ESD. The two departments provided a truly superb 
factual and analytical base not only for monetary policy, 
but also for understanding the economy in its entirety.
Concluding his speech, Mr Tshabalala expressed 
appreciation for the exceptionally high quality of the 
SARB’s communications to all its stakeholders. He 
referred to the SARB Governor’s keynote address to the 
FSCA conference in March 2024, where the Governor 
had discussed the interactions between technical 
excellence and perceived fairness. The Governor had 
stated that technical correctness was highly vulnerable to 
popular pressure unless people felt that the technically 
correct decisions were visibly, directly and quickly helping 
to make their lives better. The SARB had regularly made 
the point that South Africa’s technically excellent financial 
sector was also a powerful force for more inclusive 
national development. He commended the SARB on its 
contribution to transformation under the Broad-Based 
Black Economic Empowerment Act 53 of 2003, and to 
diversity and inclusion. In addition, he believed that the 
SARB explained its mandate and the reasons for its 
existence in a transparent and accessible manner. In 
addition, he opined that various organisations would do 
well to emulate the SARB’s capacities in the previously 
mentioned areas.
Following the vote of thanks by Mr Tshabalala, the 
Chairperson thanked him and confirmed that all the 
business included in the agenda had been transacted.
Finally, the Chairperson took the opportunity to thank 
President Cyril Ramaphosa, Deputy President Paul 
Mashatile, the government and Parliament of the Republic 
of South Africa for their continued support. The sound 
working relationship between NT and the SARB had 
continued.
He also expressed sincere appreciation to the Minister of 
Finance, Mr Enoch Godongwana; the Deputy Ministers of 
Finance, Dr David Masondo and Mr Ashor Sarupen; the 
Director-General of NT, Dr Duncan Pieterse; as well as the 
NT staff for their ongoing support of the SARB.
Sincere thanks were expressed to the members of the 
SARB Board for their continued contributions and support, 
and for ensuring appropriate corporate governance at the 
SARB.
Sincere appreciation was also expressed to DGs 
Tshazibana, Cassim and Modise for sharing the workload, 
as well as to the entire management and staff of the SARB 
for their continued dedication and support during what was 
once again a challenging year. The Chairperson thanked 
them for their contributions and stated that he was 
confident their continued efforts would ensure that the 
coming year would be even more successful.
The Chairperson then thanked the shareholders for their 
attendance and participation and confirmed that the SARB 
would continue to count on their support in future.
The Chairperson declared the proceedings closed.
E L Kganyago
Chairperson
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              215 
Additional information 2024/25
Annexure A
An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the SARB, to the 
104th AGM of the SARB 
shareholders held on Tuesday,  
30 July 2024
Introduction
After another momentous year, today we convene the 
South African Reserve Bank’s annual Ordinary General 
Meeting.
In April, we marked 30 years of South Africa’s still-young 
democracy. It has been an extraordinary three decades, 
with a global financial crisis rivalling that of 1929, a 
catastrophic health pandemic, as well as our own 
ongoing struggle to develop a new democratic 
dispensation to better address our legacy of inequality 
and poverty.
Despite these many challenges, the recent national and 
provincial elections have underscored our resilience as a 
society, with the ushering in of a new government of 
national unity.
While the SARB has been in existence for over a century, 
it is our democratic Constitution that sets its current 
mandate: to protect the value of the local currency in the 
interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth 
– and to do so without fear, favour or prejudice.
I am honoured to be part of a renewed leadership of the 
SARB, with DG Fundi Tshazibana and DG Rashad 
Cassim being reappointed, and Mampho Modise filling 
the vacant deputy governor role. Our track record 
notwithstanding, we continue to face enormous 
challenges but trust we will be supported by the 
dedicated staff of the SARB and its subsidiaries.
I now turn to our economic outlook.
The global economy continues a long recovery path from 
the pandemic. This path has been a troubled one, and 
despite better prospects in recent months, remains beset 
by risks and vulnerabilities built up during the pandemic. 
Inflation remains stubbornly high and public debt levels 
globally are at record levels. Technological development 
carries both risks to cybersecurity and the hope of large 
and sustained boosts to global productivity. Meanwhile, 
22 July appears to have been the hottest day on Earth in 
recent history.
In short, we are entering an era of new economic 
challenges, even as the recent ones have yet to be 
overcome. There is little fiscal or monetary policy space 
available to deal with the risks that could emerge to 
financial stability, renewed inflation pressures or even the 
growing challenge of climate change.
Inflation remains a major policy concern for central banks 
globally. Although global inflation declined from 8.7% in 
2022 to 6.8% in 2023, and continues to ease in 2024, it 
remains high relative to the 2–3% inflation targets that many 
countries are trying to achieve.
Restrictive monetary policy, along with the recovery in 
supply chains and other pandemic-related bottlenecks, has 
helped inflation to recede from its 2022 highs. However, 
global disinflation has slowed recently, as is well illustrated 
by consumer price inflation in the US, still sitting at 3% 
relative to their 2% target.
The slow pace of disinflation reflects a pattern of lower 
imported inflation but higher services inflation across most 
economies. In some, rising wages and sustained pent-up 
demand for services have been key factors. In emerging 
markets specifically, fiscal challenges and sustained 
currency depreciations have played more of a role.
Policy commitment to reduce inflation back to targets has 
been strongly signalled around the globe, and central banks 
have generally been cautious in their approach to policy.
Deepening geo-economic fragmentation, higher 
temperatures and other supply-related risks raise concerns 
about the long-term prospects for inflation, and 
considerable effort is going into reassessments of neutral 
real rate levels.
While inflation remains higher than desired, global economic 
activity has proven to be more resilient than expected.
Global growth surprised higher at 3.3% in 2023, despite 
considerable divergence in growth across individual 
economies. Generally, however, global growth rates are 
expected to remain below pre-pandemic trends. This 
reflects the impact of protectionist measures on global 
trade, relatively tight financial conditions as well as 
uncertainty of future policy trajectories.
Greater stability in global affairs and more sustainable fiscal 
policy settings across the G20 countries would help to 
dampen uncertainty and enable longer-term horizons for 
policymakers, firms and households.
While lowering debt levels weigh on growth in the short 
term, the longer-term effects of falling borrowing costs act 
to improve growth prospects, supporting private investment 
and freeing up fiscal space. Lower inflation would also open 
monetary policy space and support easier credit conditions, 
complementing the fiscal actions.
The SARB forecasts trading-partner growth to remain 
moderate in the medium term, hovering at around 3%.
On the domestic front, despite varied sectoral 
performances, output in the South African economy slowed 
to 0.7% in 2023 from 1.9% in 2022 and remains well below 
growth in peer emerging markets. 
Load-shedding and logistical challenges have been 
weighing heavily on economic activity, depressing the credit 
appetite of businesses and the spending of households.
Despite such weak growth in output, however, employment 
levels have recovered the 2.2 million jobs lost during the 
216 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Additional information 2024/25
height of the pandemic. As of the first quarter of this 
year, total employment surpassed its 2019 level. 
Nonetheless, job creation has been too slow and not 
enough to offset the growth in the labour force, leaving 
the unemployment rate elevated at 32.9% in the first 
quarter of this year.
South Africa’s tailwind for growth coming from strong 
terms of trade continued to fade, despite remaining at 
historically good levels. Exports also suffered over the 
past 12 months from energy and logistics challenges as 
much as price factors. Imports were also muted by 
logistics. As energy and logistics constraints continue to 
ease, the growth outlook will also improve. The domestic 
economy is expected to grow by 1.1% this year, rising to 
1.7% by 2026, as both household spending and 
investment start to strengthen.
Moving to domestic inflation, as with the global trend of 
moderating inflation, South Africa’s headline inflation 
decelerated over the past year, falling from 6.9% in 2022 
to average 6% in 2023.
These annual averages, however, hide the ongoing 
volatility in the underlying components of inflation, in turn 
demonstrating the risks and uncertainty marking the 
disinflation path. Since September of last year, headline 
inflation has been fluctuating between 5% and 6%, with 
frequent monthly setbacks coming from fuel, food and 
services prices.
In February, core inflation rose by 0.4 percentage points 
to 5%, propelled sharply higher by medical insurance 
inflation. Encouragingly, as of June, core inflation has 
moved to 4.5%. The SARB sees core inflation averaging 
4.6% this year from 4.8% last year. Inflation expectations 
eased in the first half of this year but remain well above 
the midpoint of the target band.
While headline inflation came out between 5% and 6% 
for much of the past year, our current forecast shows it 
easing to 4.9% this year, pulled lower mainly by softening 
food and fuel inflation, and resting at the midpoint in 
2025 and 2026.
Even with some quantitative and qualitative adjustments 
to risk perceptions over time, the Monetary Policy 
Committee has felt it appropriate to maintain the 
repurchase rate at 8.25%, a level set in May of 2023.
Turning to financial stability, the SARB continued to 
ensure that the financial system remains resilient, without 
any systemic threats materialising during the 2023/24 
financial year.
This is despite the risks to the outlook that include 
sustained geopolitical tensions, sticky inflation and 
government debt levels that remain uncomfortably 
elevated, globally. These risks have coincided with an 
unprecedented number of national elections around the 
world, leading to some uncertainty and heightened 
market volatility.
South Africa is still confronted with its government’s 
growing debt levels and ever-higher debt-servicing costs, 
as well as domestic financial institutions’ high exposure to 
that debt. The SARB continues to monitor this sovereign-
financial sector nexus closely.
Though we are working hard to exit the FATF greylist, the 
effects of being greylisted are being felt as foreign 
counterparties apply greater scrutiny to our domestic 
institutions.
At the same time, the impact of climate change is 
becoming more frequent and more severe, as the recent 
winter storms that lashed the Western Cape and 
necessitated the declaration of a state of disaster have 
highlighted.
As part of its ongoing efforts to understand and mitigate the 
risks, the SARB conducted its first comprehensive stress 
test of South Africa’s major insurance companies, which 
included a climate change component. Going forward, 
climate-related risk will increasingly feature as part of the 
SARB’s stress-testing scenarios.
As of 1 July 2023, the SARB became the Resolution 
Authority and is now obliged to develop resolution plans for 
systemically important banks and insurers, should they fail.
Accompanying this was the launch of CODI, a new 
subsidiary of the SARB with its own Board and Investment 
Committee. CODI will manage the country’s first deposit 
insurance scheme and covers qualifying depositors up to 
R100 000 if their bank fails, is liquidated, or placed into 
resolution. These milestones will bolster trust and 
confidence in the financial system and strengthen its 
robustness.
The regulatory and supervisory work of the PA goes hand in 
hand with our financial stability efforts. When it comes to 
the banking sector, elevated levels of inflation and rising 
interest rates have been eroding the disposable income of 
households and the profitability of businesses, resulting in a 
rise in impaired advances for banks.
The PA will continue to monitor the credit risk management 
practices of banks and make sure that prudent financial 
and risk management practices are put in place to weather 
any storm that may arise.
In its work to safeguard the interests of depositors and 
policy holders, the PA placed two institutions under judicial 
management, while it continues to monitor several 
institutions that are in various stages of resolution because 
of financial and governance-related matters.
These challenges aside, the PA has supported efforts to 
grow a more diverse financial industry, having licensed one 
bank during the period under review, with five more in 
progress. Four new insurers – three life and one non-life 
– were registered, with a further 11 applications in progress, 
six of which are life insurers. Two co-operative financial 
institutions were also registered, with a further two in 
progress.
The PA and the Financial Surveillance Department are 
driving the SARB’s efforts to get South Africa off the FATF 
greylist. FATF has identified 22 action items that South 
Africa must address to improve its anti-money laundering 
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              217 
Additional information 2024/25
and combating the financing of terrorism regime. 
Currently, eight of the 22 items have been addressed or 
largely addressed, and 14 remain in progress. South 
Africa is left with two reporting cycles, in September 
2024 and January 2025, in terms of the action plan.
Although foreign counterparties have been applying 
greater scrutiny to our domestic institutions because of 
the FATF greylisting, the PA has found no immediate 
negative impact on correspondent banking relationships. 
It is nevertheless imperative that the action items are 
addressed timeously to avoid long-term negative effects 
on the economy.
Moving to operational matters: during the year under 
review, the SARB saw the overhaul of its balance sheet 
with the introduction of new arrangements governing the 
Gold and Foreign Exchange Contingency Reserve 
Account, or GFECRA. Announced in February 2024, the 
new GFECRA framework will allow the government to 
access a portion of these funds to reduce debt issuance, 
while providing the SARB with a stronger capital position. 
In June, these arrangements were passed into law with 
the gazetting of the Gold and Foreign Exchange 
Contingency Reserve Account Defrayal Amendment Act 
27of 2024. This Act was accompanied by the signing of 
the GFECRA settlement agreement between the SARB 
and the Minister of Finance. The agreement ensures that, 
among other conditions, the SARB’s solvency is not 
undermined by any GFECRA profits distribution. These 
distributions will be used to reduce government 
borrowing. There will be no sales of FX reserves if such 
reserves are below estimated adequacy levels.
As of 1 July, R100 billion had been transferred to the 
SARB, and roughly three-quarters of the R100 billion due 
to NT this year has already been paid out. We expect to 
complete the transfers by mid-August.
The SARB is the custodian of South Africa’s national 
payment system. In the past, payment systems were 
often viewed as the ‘boring plumbing’ underpinning a 
central bank’s work. But with the rapid advancements in 
fintech, payment systems globally are instead becoming 
central to innovation, enabling more digital transaction 
offerings, reducing the reliance on cash, and providing 
new ways to drive financial inclusion and economic 
development.
The recently published Digital Payments Roadmap 
outlines the key interventions that the SARB, together 
with public and private stakeholders, will implement to 
advance efforts to improve digital payments adoption by 
consumers.
The SARB’s PEM programme will further support efforts 
to make domestic payments cheaper, faster, more 
reliable and more accessible to underserved 
communities. The programme includes the establishment 
of a new centralised public payments utility and the 
renewal of the domestic settlement system, namely the 
SAMOS system. The SARB will also implement 
foundational enablers such as a digital financial identity 
for consumers.
Alongside modernisation efforts, the SARB remains 
committed to ensuring that our payment and settlement 
services continue to serve the industry effectively and 
efficiently. To this end, in June, we successfully migrated 
the SADC-RTGS to the ISO 20022 global financial 
messaging standard. ISO 20022 is an open standard for 
payments messaging that creates a common language and 
model for payments data across countries. The adoption of 
this new standard by the SADC-RTGS and its participants 
comes well ahead of the global November 2025 deadline.
In its day-to-day operations, the SARB procures a range of 
goods and services. Its procurement strategy is focused on 
fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective 
purchasing. Although the SARB is exempt from the PPPFA, 
it nevertheless applies preferential procurement principles in 
its sourcing and procurement activities. This year has been 
the first of a three-year B-BBEE strategy, demonstrating our 
commitment to maintaining and improving spend with 
qualifying suppliers. The bulk of the SARB’s R4.7 billion in 
spending – or a little over 91% – went to local suppliers. 
Using the Generic Codes of Good Practice scorecard, the 
SARB achieved 21.6 out of a possible 27 points in terms of 
recognised B-BBEE spend.
Information and technology infrastructure is critical to the 
functioning of the SARB. The rapid changes in how we use 
and process information affect every facet of our work. The 
proactive management of the SARB’s networks and 
systems has ensured that mission-critical business 
applications have remained up and running 99.9% of the 
time over the past year.
The resilience of our systems has been enhanced by 
initiatives such as the redesign of our data centres and 
network modernisation. We are also working to build a 
workforce of the future, strengthening our cyber team to 
build local and regional resilience to cyber incidents.
Our commitment to serving the economic well-being of all 
South Africans is also evidenced in our CSI programme, 
which focuses primarily on education. At the heart of this 
work is our external bursary programme, which aims to 
develop human capital in monetary policy, financial 
stability, data science and economic journalism. In 2023, 
the SARB sponsored 110 students – 63 continuing 
bursars, 35 first-year bursars and 12 students studying 
towards their master’s degree in data science. Eighty six 
percent are from previously disadvantaged backgrounds 
and 63% are female.
The importance of the SARB’s role in our economy 
demands the utmost from its staff members. Without 
their commitment and expertise, this central bank would 
not be able to achieve its strategic objectives or deliver 
on its mandate.
To ensure that staff continue developing their professional 
skills, the SARB’s spend on training increased to almost 
6% of total payroll in the 2023/24 financial year. More 
than half of the employees that received training, or 56%, 
were women.
218 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
       
Additional information 2024/25
Diverse organisations which reflect the societies they 
operate in are typically more successful. Having rolled 
out the third phase of its D&I programme, the SARB has 
incorporated a diversity and inclusion accountability 
framework into its performance scorecard, ensuring it is 
embedded in everything that we do.
At the same time, our staff experience is being steadily 
improved through the digitalisation of our people 
management systems.
To conclude, the year ahead will throw new challenges at 
the SARB. Our international activities will receive 
particular focus as South Africa takes up the G20 
Presidency. Together with NT, the SARB is gearing up to 
co-chair the Finance Track from December 2024. It will 
focus on, among other issues, global macroeconomic 
matters, climate change, cross-border payments and 
capital flows, as well as the financial inclusion agenda.
Over the past year, the SARB has worked to ensure a 
coherent G20 agenda which is relevant for the country, 
the G20 members and the African continent. South 
Africa is the fourth country in the Global South to lead 
the G20 Presidency before it moves back to an 
advanced economy.
On the regional front, we have prioritised a strategy 
focused on the integration of SADC member countries, 
in our role as Chair and Secretariat of the SADC CCBG.
The year 2025 will also mark the culmination of the 
SARB’s five-year strategy cycle. The formulation of our 
new Strategy 2030 is currently underway. Whatever the 
outcome of this process, I can assure you that the 
SARB, as your central bank, will remain in service to  
the country.
We will continue to ensure the cost-effective availability 
and integrity of our currency. We will continue to ensure 
that the financial sector safeguards depositors and policy 
holders. We will continue to enhance South Africa’s 
resilience to external shocks.
But above all, we will hold fast to our price and financial 
stability mandates.
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
       
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              219 
Abbreviations
ABHL African Bank Holdings Limited
AGM annual Ordinary General Meeting
AI artificial intelligence
AML/CFT  anti-money laundering and 
countering the financing of terrorism
BA Bachelor of Arts
Banks Act Banks Act 94 of 1990
BA (returns) Banker’s Acceptance (returns)
B-BBEE broad-based black economic   
 empowerment
BBS bounce back scheme
BCBS Basel Committee on Banking   
 Supervision 
BCM Business Continuity Management
BDO BDO SA Inc. 
BIS Bank for International Settlements
Board Board of Directors
bps basis points
BREC Board Risk and Ethics Committee
BRICS  An association of five 
major emerging national 
economies Brazil, Russia, India, 
China and South Africa
BSc Bachelor of Science
BSTD  Business Solutions and Technology 
Department
CA(SA) Chartered Accountant South Africa
CBA Co-operative Banks Act 40 of 2007
CBDC central bank digital currency
CCBG  Committee of Central Bank 
Governors
CCyB countercyclical capital buffer
CEO Chief Executive Officer
CFI co-operative financial institution
CFO Chief Financial Officer 
CIA Chief Internal Auditor 
CIS collective investment scheme
CISU Cyber and Information Security Unit
CLF committed liquidity facility
CODI Corporation for Deposit Insurance
Constitution  Constitution of the Republic of 
South Africa, 1996
COO Chief Operating Officer
CoP Community of Practice
CPD Corporation for Public Deposits
CPD Act  Corporation for Public Deposits Act 
46 of 1984
CPI consumer price index
CRST climate risk stress test
CSI corporate social investment
CSIR  Council for Scientific and Industrial 
Research
CVA Credit Valuation Adjustment
D&I diversity and inclusion
DFID Digital Financial Identity
DG Deputy Governor
DIF Deposit Insurance Fund
EAD exposure at default
EBBS energy bounce back scheme
EBITDA  earnings before interest, taxes, 
depreciation and amortization
ECDF empirical cumulative distribution  
 function
ECL expected credit loss
EES Employee Engagement Survey
EFA enablement focus area
EIR effective interest rate
ERD Economic Research Department 
ESD Economic Statistics Department 
ESG  environmental, social and 
governance 
EVP employee value proposition
ex officio  by virtue of one’s position or status 
(Latin)
EY Ernst & Young Incorporated
FATF Financial Action Task Force 
FCI Financial Conditions Index
FEC foreign exchange contract
FIC Financial Intelligence Centre 
FIC Act  Financial Intelligence Centre Act 38 
of 2001
fintech financial technology
FinStab Financial Stability Department
Flac financial loss absorbing capacity
FMA Financial Markets Act 19 of 2012 
FMD Financial Markets Department
FMIs financial market infrastructures 
FPS fast payment system
FSB Financial Stability Board
FSC Financial Stability Committee
FSCA Financial Sector Conduct Authority
FSD Financial Services Department
Abbreviations 2024/25
FSCF Financial Sector Contingency Forum
FSI 6  Financial Soundness Standards for 
Insurers 6
FSI Work Programme  Financial Sector Issues Work 
Programme
FSOC  Financial Stability Oversight 
Committee
FSR Act  Financial Sector Regulation Act 9 of 
2017 
FVOCI  fair value through other 
comprehensive income
FVPL fair value through profit or loss
FX foreign exchange
G20 Group of Twenty
GDP gross domestic product
GEC Governors’ Executive Committee
GFECRA  Gold and Foreign Exchange 
Contingency Reserve Account
GIBS  Gordon Institute of Business 
Science
GRC governance, risk and compliance
Hons Honours (degree)
IAD Internal Audit Department
IAIS  International Association of 
Insurance Supervisors
IAS International Accounting Standards
i.e. id est (that is to say) (Latin)
IFI international financial institution
IFRS  International Financial Reporting 
Standards
IFWG  Intergovernmental Fintech Working 
Group
IMF International Monetary Fund
Inc. incorporated
IP Investment Policy
ISO  International Organization for 
Standardization
ISSB  International Sustainability Standards 
Board
IT information technology
I&T information and technology
King IV™  King IV™ Report on Corporate 
Governance in South Africa, 2016
KZN KwaZulu-Natal
LEX Large Exposures
LGD loss given default
LGS loan guarantee scheme
LLB Bachelor of Laws 
LLM Master of Laws 
LTI lost-time injury
LUMI  LUMI Technologies SA Proprietary 
Limited
MBA Master of Business Administration
MI market infrastructure
MP Member of Parliament
MPC Monetary Policy Committee
MPF Monetary Policy Forum
MPhil Master of Philosophy
MPIF  monetary policy implementation 
framework
MPR Monetary Policy Review
NCR National Credit Regulator 
NGFS  Network for Greening the Financial 
System
NPS national payment system
NPS Act  National Payment System Act 78 of 
1998
NPSD  National Payment System 
Department
NPU national payments utility
NRF National Revenue Fund
NT National Treasury
OCI other comprehensive income
OPI WG  Open Finance Integration Working 
Group
OTC over the counter
PA Prudential Authority
PC Procurement Committee
PCN positive cycle-neutral
PD probability of default
PEB post-employment benefits
PEM Payments Ecosystem Modernisation
PhD Doctor of Philosophy/Doctorate
PoC proof of concept
PPA power purchase agreement
PPE property, plant and equipment
ppm parts per million
PPPFA  Procurement Policy Framework Act 
5 of 2000
Prestige Bullion  Prestige Bullion (RF) Proprietary 
Limited
Pruco Prudential Committee
Abbreviations 2024/25
220 SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25
Notes to the consolidated and separate financial 
statements continued
for the year ended 31 March 2025 
RCLF  restricted-use committed liquidity 
facility
Remco Remuneration Committee
repo rate repurchase rate
RGU Regulatory Guidance Unit
RMC Risk Management Committee
RMCD  Risk Management and Compliance 
Department
RSB Regulatory Sandbox
RTGS (system) real-time gross settlement (system)
RVM Residual Vulnerability Matrix
SAA Strategic Asset Allocation
SABN  South African Bank Note Company 
(RF) Proprietary Limited
SADC  Southern African Development 
Community 
SA Mint  South African Mint Company (RF) 
Proprietary Limited
SAMOS (system)  South African Multiple Option 
Settlement (system)
SARB South African Reserve Bank
SARB Act  South African Reserve Bank Act 90 of 
1989, as amended
SARB debentures  South African Reserve Bank 
debentures
SARB Group  South African Reserve Bank Group, 
including its subsidiaries and associate
SDR special drawing right
SFA strategic focus area
SICR significant increase in credit risk
SIFI  systemically important financial 
institution
SME  small- and medium-sized enterprise
SNG Grant Thornton  SizweNtsalubaGobodo Grant Thornton 
Inc.
SPPI  solely payments of principal and 
interest
SRM supplier relationship management
Stats SA Statistics South Africa
SWP Strategic Workforce Plan
UK United Kingdom
Unisa University of South Africa
UP University of Pretoria
US United States
VAT value-added tax
Vision 2025  National Payment System 
Framework and Strategy Vision 
2025
Wits University of the Witwatersrand
XDR the currency in which an SDR is  
 valued
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK  ANNUAL REPORT 2024/25              221 
Abbreviations 2024/25
www.resbank.co.za
